"x"
"1""Greeces leftwing government has passed legislation enabling citizens to determine their gender identity amid fierce condemnation from the Orthodox church and accusations the law would destroy human beings. After two days of highly charged debate, the prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, rallied parliament to endorse policies that would permit people to legally change their gender on all official documents without undergoing sterilisation.   Related: There are reasons to be cheerful ... LGBTI rights gains in unlikely countries | Peter Tatchell    The law, which was passed with 171 votes in favour and 114 against, had exposed political divisions and entrenched beliefs in one of Europes most socially conservative societies. It will allow trans individuals to affirm their desired gender from the age of 15 and brings Greece in line with most EU member states. No tradition, no religion, no perception of family requires citizens to remain on the margins or be pushed into institutional and social oblivion, Tsipras told MPs before the vote.  The legislation, he said, was aimed squarely at ending the marginalisation of people whose perceived gender identity did not correspond with that assigned at birth.  What God is it that has us take decisions that push children into [situations of] bullying, humiliation and suicides?, he asked. Almost the entire political opposition, with the exception of the small, centrist To Potami party, rejected the proposed bill. Rescinding an earlier pledge to back the legislation, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, who heads the centre-right New Democracy party, said that while every person had the right to self-determination it was wrong to extend such life-changing decisions to people under the age of 18.  For such a decision, maturity is required which only age can guarantee, he said. It makes no sense to us that a 15-year-old, who is prohibited from consuming alcohol, is allowed to take such an important decision  a decision that should be taken with medical expertise. It was also opposed by the powerful Greek Orthodox church, which had denounced the legislation as a satanic deed that would lead to the destruction of social cohesion and the spiritual necrosis of man. Bishops, echoing the view of the neo-fascist Golden Dawn party, argued that the law had an ulterior aim: to allow same-sex couples to adopt children. The ultimate goal of this law is to allow homosexuals to adopt children, Metropolitan Nicholas of Phthiotis told parishioners.  Do you see how far these Greek Orthodox deputies have sunk? They have brought blasphemy upon the human body. Today they tell us that God did not create man and women  every man can easily become a women, and every women a man. It is a satanic deed.  The Holy Synod, the churchs governing body, claimed the law would destroy human beings. The legislation means official records, registers and documents, including birth certificates and school diplomas, will match designated gender identity.  Greece joins Denmark, Ireland, Malta and Norway in adopting legislation that requires neither psychiatric diagnosis nor medical intervention to determine gender recognition.  Previously gender could only be changed in cases where gender dysphoria was diagnosed and reproductive organs removed. This is about human and civil rights, Nikos Xydakis, a leading member of the governing Syriza party told the Guardian. It is about humanity, solidarity and dignity.  There are times when politicians have to be more progressive than society and I am delighted that Greece will now be among the most liberal EU countries on this issue.  A former EU foreign affairs minister, Xydakis said he had been shocked by the testimonies of trans people who had come forward when the bill was discussed in draft form at committee level.  What we heard were stories of existential drama, of very vulnerable people being forced to live in the dark. It reminded me of the ridiculous divorce laws that existed in this country where you literally had to find your spouse in bed with someone else to legally split, he said. Members of Greeces trans community gathered outside parliament to hail the bills passage. On Monday, as debate reached fever pitch and Orthodox faithful deplored the move as deviant and depraved, supporters unfurled a large banner outside the sandstone building that declared: Transgender rights are human rights.  For campaigners the bill is long overdue. Bullying and discrimination  commonplace in schools  has reportedly soared among trans children with teachers complaining of a lack of support and information to combat it.  Nancy Papathanasiou, a clinical psychologist, who oversees an LGBT helpline in Athens, said gender recognition was often a matter of life and death for those who called in. We get calls from people all over Greece and every age, she said in an interview. Among the older generation, in the countryside, people call in saying, only now can I understand what I am feeling, that it has a name.  Experts had been shocked by the number of pleas for help from people in large metropolitan areas. We expected most calls to come from the countryside but around 50% are made from urban areas because of the lack of support and health services in place.  This is a brave new world in Greece. For the first time, we are talking openly about things that no one dared talk about."
"2""The Home Office is to be challenged to provide gender-neutral, or X, passports to UK citizens at a high court hearing this week. The application for a judicial review is being made by lawyers on behalf of Christie Elan-Cane, who has campaigned on the issue for 25 years and given evidence to parliament about transgender equality. Last month Canada became the 10th country to offer citizens gender-neutral travel documents. Australia, Denmark, Germany, Malta, New Zealand, Pakistan, India, Ireland and Nepal already have a third category besides male and female. Standards for machine-readable passports set by the UN International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) allow for individual states to enter M, F or X in the category specifying an individuals sex. X stands for unspecified. Elan-Crane appeared before the Commons women and equalities select committee two years ago to give evidence for their inquiry into transgender equality.  Legitimate identity is a fundamental human right but non-gendered people are often treated as though we have no rights, Elan-Cane said. The UKs passport application process requires applicants to declare whether they are male or female. It is inappropriate and wrong that someone who defines as neither should be forced to make that declaration. Elan-Cane, who was born a women but began transitioning after surgery, believes individuals should be given more than the binary choice of being a man or a women. Since July more than 40 MPs have signed an early day motion in favour of gender-neutral passports.  Elan-Cane argues the government is discriminating against its own citizens as it allows holders of foreign X passports to enter the country at border checks. The permission hearing is expected to be held in the administrative division of the high court in London on Wednesday. Elan-Canes initial application on paper was dismissed.   Solicitors from Clifford Chance as well as Kate Gallafent QC and Tom Mountford of Blackstone Chambers are working pro bono on the claim. They will argue that Elan-Canes human rights under articles 8 and 14 of the European convention on human rights  the right to private and family life and absence of discrimination  are being illegally restricted by the Home Offices refusal. They maintain that UK nationals whose identities are neither male nor female are subject to and humiliated by a discriminatory passport policy that fails to acknowledge their identities or their existence. Elan-Cane planned to launch the legal challenge two years ago but held off pending the select committee inquirys findings. The MPs final report recommended that the government must look into the need to create a legal category for those people with a gender identity outside that which is binary and the full implications of this. Meanwhile, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) has suggested the sex question in the next census, in 2021, could be made voluntary in response to claims that it discriminates against transgender people. The move would make the UK one of the first countries in the world not to require its citizens to tell officials what sex they are. A two-step option, with separate sex and gender identity questions, was ruled out.  The ONS has explored other options, including a hybrid question with the addition of an other category. We would tentatively recommend that an unchanged 2011 census question should not be mandatory, for the benefit of, particularly, intersex and non-binary people who cannot choose male or female as a reflection of their current sex or gender, it said in a report. It also recommended changes to better meet the needs of trans respondents, such as removing sex and adding one or more additional categories for non-binary and intersex people. "
"3""The boss of Qantas has topped a list of the worlds top LGBT executives in recognition of his support for legalising same-sex marriage in Australia. Alan Joyce, who joined the airline in 2000, was described as a passionate advocate for LGBT+ rights in the leading 100 LGBT+ executives list compiled by networking group OUTstanding and the Financial Times. Also included in the list were Inga Beale, the chief executive of Lloyds of London; the Bupa UK boss, David Hynam; and Stacey Friedman, general counsel at JPMorgan Chase. Joyce, 51, has been a vocal supporter of the campaign to legalise same-sex marriage in Australia, where the result of a controversial postal ballot is expected on 15 November. He was on the receiving end of a pie protest in May by a 67-year-old man who claimed that companies such as Qantas that support marriage equality were guilty of corporate bullying aimed at social engineering. In response, Joyce said: Qantas has always spoken up on gender issues, on LGBTI issues, on indigenous issues and we will continue to do so and no attempt at bullying us into suppressing our voice will work. He said more than 1,300 companies in Australia had backed the yes campaign in the ballot, with even Sir Richard Branson  who owns a stake in Qantass archrival Virgin Australia  endorsing the airlines support for a yes vote. Speaking about the postal ballot, Joyce told the BBC: As an openly gay man and being the leader of this organisation and a high-profile business leader in Australia, I felt it was very important that I led by example and was out there promoting the case.   Related: Sixty per cent of postal survey voters have said yes to marriage equality  Guardian Essential poll    The one-time Aer Lingus executive has run Qantas since 2008 and returned the airline to robust financial health. Joyce praised Australia for being a great meritocracy, adding: Where else in the world would you have an openly gay Irish man coming to this country to run probably the most iconic Australian brand in the world? Joyces citation on the OUTstanding list added: He has  taken a very public stance in campaigning in favour of marriage equality as a fundamental human rights issue. This has attracted a range of reactions and sparked a broader debate about the role of business when it comes to social issues. His involvement has also resulted in a great deal of international media coverage, providing an even bigger platform to the fight for diversity and equality. Last month it emerged that Joyces pay package nearly doubled to A$24.6m (14.3m) for 2016-17.  The big jump reflected a surge in the Qantas share price in the past financial year, the companys annual report said, which meant his performance-based incentives rose from about A$3m to more than A$18m."
"4""Boys need to be raised to be feminists as much as girls because our sons have the power and the responsibility to change our culture of sexism, Justin Trudeau, Canadas prime minister, wrote in an essay published on Wednesday.   Teaching boys to be feminists gives them a sense of justice and empathy and helps them escape the pressure to be a particular kind of masculine that is damaging to men and those around them, Trudeau writes. I want them to be comfortable being themselves, and being feminists  who stand up for whats right, and who can look themselves in the eye with pride. Trudeau said he had been thinking about how to raise his daughter, Ella-Grace, as a feminist when his wife, Sophie, reminded him that their sons Xavier and Hadrien needed to be advocates for women as well.  All of us benefit when women and girls have the same opportunities as men and boys  and its on all of us to make that a reality, he wrote in an essay for Marie Claire magazine. Our sons have the power and the responsibility to change our culture of sexism. Feminism, noted Trudeau, was not just the belief that men and women are equal. Its the knowledge that when we are all equal, all of us are more free.  Trudeau, 45, frequently describes himself as a feminist. After taking power in 2015, he drew global attention by appointing a cabinet with an equal number of men and women. This year his government followed in the footsteps of Sweden in adopting what it called a feminist policy toward foreign aid.    Related: Is Justin Trudeau living up to his self-proclaimed feminist ideals?    As his government approaches two years in power, however, it has been critised for failing to transform Trudeaus pronouncements on gender equality into concrete actions aimed at addressing the challenges facing Canadian women.  As many as 4,000 indigenous women have gone missing or been murdered in the past three decades, while the number of indigenous women in prison has soared. Childcare costs in Canada rank among the highest in the OECD, while a persistent pay gap has sent the country tumbling to 35th place in the World Economic Forums global gender gap rankings.  While his government has committed to presenting pay equity legislation for federally regulated sectors, it has said it will not do so until 2018. Trudeaus essay, penned to mark the UNs International Day of the Girl, comes months after his wife, Sophie Grgoire Trudeau, set off a social media firestorm after suggesting that women celebrate International women Day by highlighting boys and men who promote gender equality. At the time, many blasted Grgoire Trudeaus stance  posted on several social media sites  for being tone deaf. Others juxtaposed Grgoire Trudeaus words with her husbands actions.  If your husband were a true feminist and, by your own definition isnt afraid to speak up in front of others, he would denounce Trump personally and his administrations misogyny. Until he does, hes a lip-service feminist and I cant take him seriously as a fighter for the cause, noted one response to Grgoire Trudeaus post. The publication of Trudeaus essay coincided with his visit to Washington DC, where he met with Donald Trump, who has come under heavy criticism for his attitudes toward women. During his campaign to become president, a videotape was released in which he could be heard bragging about groping and having sex with women.   Since taking power, his administration has proposed or undertaken measures curbing women rights, particularly in the areas of abortion access, health insurance, childcare and workplace policies.   Last week, his administration stripped out requirements under the Obama-era Affordable Care Act law that required employers to provide insurance to cover women birth control."
"5""A black former Metropolitan police officer who suffered post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) following an assault while on duty has been given the right to sue her bosses for discrimination at an employment tribunal. The supreme court ruling on Wednesday has been hailed as a gamechanger in the workplace by Race4Justice, a coalition of equality groups that intervened in the case.  It says that not only police officers but also judges, magistrates, lay tribunal members, barristers, solicitors, doctors, dentists, nurses and other professionals could now be entitled to the full protection of equality legislation previously denied to them. Employees such as the former Met officer who brought the case had been barred from suing their employers for discrimination if an internal misconduct panel made adverse findings about them, because the panels enjoyed judicial immunity.  The supreme court has now removed that immunity. Workers who believe they have been victims of discrimination on the grounds of race, gender or disability can now pursue discrimination claims against their employers at an employment tribunal. The Equality and Human Rights Commission also intervened in the case along with Race4Justice, which includes the Society of Black Lawyers and Operation Black Vote.  Race4Justice said the ruling was significant. We are writing to the Ministry of Justice to ask them to clarify all the professions as well as the police that todays ruling will apply to, a spokesperson said. The judges ruled that police officers are entitled to bring discrimination claims before an employment tribunal in respect of dismissals following proceedings before a police misconduct panel.  The women who brought the case was assaulted in 2010 and suffered PTSD as a result. She was involved in an incident that led to her arrest and dismissal in September 2011. The officer was drunk at the time, but she attributed some aspects of her behaviour to her PTSD.    There should be no hiding place in the form of judicial immunity for decision-making bodies  Herman Ouseley, former chair of the Commission for Racial Equality     Following an investigation she faced disciplinary charges. She accepted that she had been guilty of the alleged misconduct, but relied on her good prior record as an officer and her PTSD in mitigation, along with medical evidence that her behaviour was partly attributable to her condition. The police misconduct panel decided, however, that she should be dismissed without notice. She tried to bring a claim against the Met at an employment tribunal, including a claim for disability discrimination. The employment tribunal struck out her claim in June 2103 and the employment appeal tribunal dismissed her appeal in March 2014.  The basis of both decisions was that the police misconduct panel was a judicial body and, as such, enjoyed immunity from such a legal claim. Following Wednesdays judgment, Black, Asian and other ethnic minorities, women, gay and disabled workers can now go to employment tribunals to claim unfair discrimination in the course of disciplinary and misconduct tribunals. The supreme court judges overturned a previous decision by the court of appeal. It decided that the equal treatment directive of the EU has direct effect in UK law, ensuring that employees and office holders appointed by the crown must have a remedy to claim discrimination against disciplinary or misconduct tribunals. The Race4Justice coalition filed an amicus brief at the supreme court and said that Wednesdays case was part of a new civil rights strategy using the courts to challenge discrimination and advance the cause of race equality. Herman Ouseley, a former chair of the Commission for Racial Equality and the chair of Kick It Out, said: There should be no hiding place in the form of judicial immunity for decision-making bodies, decision-makers and their processes.  Too many attempts have already been made by the state to restrict access to and therefore deny justice for individuals rightfully seeking to invoke the provisions of the Equality Act 2010. No more denial of justice. Lee Jasper, the chair of the London Race and Criminal Justice Consortium, said: The filing of an amicus brief indicates a renewed determination by British black organisations to embark on a focused legal strategy to achieve civil rights and equality. The notion of legal immunity from the Equalities Act 2010 will now be the subject of intense legal examination.    "
"6""Almost all Australian girls aged between 10 and 17 surveyed about gender inequality said they receive unequal treatment to boys, and 91% said it would be easier to get ahead if they were treated like boys. On Wednesday the child rights agency Plan International Australia released the results from a survey of 1,742 girls in a report called The Dream Gap: Australian girls views on inequality. The survey was conducted by Essential Research and saw 10-17 year olds from across the country asked about their ambitions and views on gender. The girls were asked the same questions, but split into two age groups; 10-14 year-olds and 15-17 year olds, so questions could be asked in age-appropriate ways.   quote rotator   Asked if boys and girls were sometimes treated differently 96% of the 10-14 year old girls and 98% of the 15-17 year-old girls said yes. Asked if girls were treated as equals at home, 61% of 10-14 year-olds and 36% of 15-17 year-olds said yes. Just 16% of 10-14 year-olds and 7% of 15-17 year olds said girls were treated as equal to men in magazines, while 16% and 6% respectively believed girls were treated equally in sport.   equal treatment chart   Of girls aged 15-17, 93% said it would be easier to get ahead in life if they were not judged on their appearance. As girls get older, their confidence decreases, the survey found. While 56% of 10 year-old girls viewed themselves as confident at 10, this dropped to just 44% of 17 year-olds. Preliminary data included in the report from a survey to be released next shows just 27% of 18-25 year-old women reported feeling confident. While sport and media were the places where girls felt most inequality, the report also found 86% of the girls said they were just as good at sport as boys. While 95% of 10 to 14 year-old girls and 96% of 15-17 year-old girls said they were just as good at being leaders as boys, 40% of them believed gender inequality was the biggest barrier to them becoming a leader. And 80% and 90% of the girls respectively said they were as good as boys at science and maths. Its extremely worrying that girls are so rapidly losing their aspirations to leadership, and this correlates with their perceptions of a loss of opportunities for them to lead, the report found.   Related: Standards body unveils plan to crack down on sexist advertisements    Four-fifths of the girls said there was more attention on girls looks than boys. The report calls on the federal government to work with media and the advertising industry to ban sexist advertising and excessive use of Photoshop to prevent girls and boys growing up with unhealthy stereotypes. State and territory governments should remove gendered school uniforms, the report also said, and more should be done to fight the gender pay gap, including conducting pay gap audits. Lead researcher on the report Dr Rebecca Huntley said the report showed women believed they were capable, but despite this were not being given the opportunities to demonstrate their strengths as they grew up. Young Australian women are among the most highly educated in the world and this survey suggests that they believe they can do anything, Huntley said. But theyre able to see genuine barriers to their success that they cant control, like their gender and the way that they look. A consistent finding from surveys of mens attitudes to women in the workplace is that men start thinking about these issues when they have daughters. Do we have to wait that long? Why are they not aware before then of whats happening to their sisters, girlfriends and female friends?   Related: Poor body image makes girls less assertive and risks health, study finds    The deputy CEO Plan International Australia Susanne Legena said Australia needed to follow the lead of the UK, where in July the Advertising Standards Authority toughened rules on ads by banning those that perpetuated sexist stereotypes. Parents try to tell their children that they are valued for more than their bodies but then theyre getting these contradictory messages from advertising all of the time, Legena said. Of course you cant ban everything, but we know sex sells and we keep doing it just because it works rather than challenging it and systemically trying to change the way we depict women and girls. She said for societal change to come leaders, including politicians, needed to be bold and brave, call out sexism and model equality and respect towards women.   Related: Fake model scouts tricking UK girls into sharing explicit photos    When you look at Question Time it is the epitome of disrespectful and it favours an aggressive and argumentative type of leadership, she said. How do you explain the behaviour of these leaders to children? Women politicians are making great gains and standing up for the need to respect women but that has to permeate everything we do and we need men to call out people behaving badly.   Girls' and young women's views on leadership   Between 25% and 34% of girls consider themselves to be shy and 25 to 33% consider themselves quiet, while only 1 to 3% of girls considered these to bevaluable qualities in a leader. Kindness and friendliness were values considered by girls surveyed to be both a quality of leaders and a quality girls themselves possess. But this was not translating into women with a diversity of traits being given opportunities to lead, Legena said. She said it was time to reconsider which qualities should be considered as strengths. Change has been glacial, she said. Gender inequality its causing us harm and pain, and you wonder what could be achieved if society was willing to unleash the talent and potential of half of the population. I dont know why we are being so circumspect and slow in giving people equality and human rights in Australia."
"7""Norways defence minister, Ine Eriksen Sreide, has became the countrys first female foreign minister, in a cabinet reshuffle that put the three most senior government jobs in the hands of women.  Sreide, 41, replaces Brge Brende, who is stepping down to take over as president of the World Economic Forum. She is the first women to become the top diplomat in Norway, a member of Nato. Sreide joins the prime minister, Erna Solberg, and the finance minister, Siv Jensen, in holding the top three spots in the rightwing coalition government. Were not the first in the world but it is a page in Norways history that is being written, Solberg said at a press conference. The Philippines, Switzerland and Liberia have already had such a constellation, she added. Like its Scandinavian neighbours, Norway is a pioneer in gender equality: in 1986, the Labour government of had almost as many female cabinet members as men, with eight out of 18. Solberg also announced that Frank Bakke-Jensen would be taking over as defence minister, while his European affairs portfolio would be handed to newcomer Marit Berger Rsland. In power since 2013, the right won a narrow victory in legislative elections on 11September.  According to Norwegian media, Solberg could announce another government reshuffle by the end of the year if the small centre-right Liberal party joins the minority coalition, made up of Solbergs Conservatives and Jensens anti-immigration Progress party."
"8""A referendum on banning same-sex marriage has drawn international anti-gay marriage campaigners to Romania including Kim Davis, the Kentucky clerk briefly jailed for refusing to issue marriage licences to gay couples. Davis is on a nine-day tour of Romania before a referendum to be held before the end of the year on a proposed amendment to the countrys constitution, which would rule out any possibility of legalising same-sex marriage. Liberty Counsel, an Orlando-based anti-LGBT Christian group that represented Davis in her 2015 court battle, said she and another group member were speaking in two major Romanian cities and had met Orthodox church archbishops.   Related: Kentucky Senate votes to create separate marriage forms for same-sex couples    Romanias civil code prohibits same-sex partnership and civil partnerships are not recognised, but the constitution  which defines marriage as between spouses  is gender neutral so could in theory allow gay unions at some future stage. After a campaign by the Coalition for the Family  many of whose 40 member groups have links to the Orthodox church or promote the traditional family  a petition calling for a referendum on constitutional change gathered 3m signatures in 2015  six times the number required to put the demand before parliament. We have the constitutional right and moral obligation to defend the family from trends in modern society that reduce its importance and accelerate its decline, the organisations website says. It wants the constitution amended to define marriage as union between a man and a women. The petition is being examined by Romanias constitutional court but, with the support of all major political parties, is thought almost certain to win parliamentary backing, allowing the referendum to take place possibly as early as next month.  The powerful leader of Romanias ruling Social Democratic party (PSD), Liviu Dragnea, has said the government was committed to the change and plans to hold the referendum this autumn. Even if some of my colleagues in Brussels are unhappy about it, we will make it happen, he said last month.  A turnout of more than 30% would ensure the constitutional change goes ahead, to the alarm of Romanian civil rights groups, who have argued the referendums only aim is to incite public opinion against LGBT people and have criticised it as an erosion of Romanian democracy.     Kim Davis in Romania. Photograph: Liberty Counsel    Respect, a civic platform of about 100 pro-rights groups formed this summer to fight the amendment, said the referendum must be opposed. We are seeing a determined attempt to use religion or traditional themes to oppose human rights, said the platforms founder, Cristian Prvulescu. We know how this ends. The move would also bring Bucharest into a potentially broader conflict with the European Union, already concerned by the increasingly illiberal, socially conservative and even authoritarian drift of some eastern European governments such as those in Hungary and Poland. At least two US-based conservative Christian groups, including Liberty Counsel and Alliance Defending Freedom, have reportedly provided advice to Romanias Coalition for the Family, submitting legal opinions backing the referendum to the countrys constitutional court.   Related: Kentucky clerk Kim Davis watches as same-sex couple gets marriage license    Harry Mihet, Liberty Counsels vice-president of legal affairs, was accompanying Davis  who spent five days in prison for refusing to issue marriage licences to gay couples in Rowan County, Kentucky  on her visit. Their message is simple and based upon the recent lessons learned in the United States, the group said in a statement. Same-sex marriage and freedom of conscience are mutually exclusive, because those who promote the former have zero tolerance for the latter. Liberty Counsel is primarily a legal advocacy group. In the US, Liberty Counsel is active in defending the practice of reparative therapy, a discredited and potentially harmful form of counselling that attempts to convert a persons sexual orientation from gay, lesbian or bisexual to straight. Reparative therapy is typically practiced on children. Its clients have included Scott Lively, who encouraged Ugandas anti-gay movement shortly before it produced its infamous bill to outlaw homosexuality under penalty of death.  It was listed as an anti-LGBT hate group in 2013 by the Southern Poverty Law Center, which accused it of spreading false and defamatory information about LGBT people. Heidi Beirich, director of SPLCs Intelligence Project, said: In 2016, Liberty Counsel filed an amicus brief with the constitutional court of Romania in support of the countrys proposed constitutional amendment to define marriage as one man and one women.  The brief peddles junk science that pushes a false and harmful narrative, which includes statements such as engaging in homosexual conduct is dangerous among other false claims."
"9""After Shinzo Abes crushing defeat of the opposition in Sundays election five Japan experts give their views on what lies ahead for the country  and the region. We need to talk about pacifism A mature debate about constitutional reform is exactly what Japan needs right now. Its extremely important, but its been largely sidetracked by ideological disagreements from both the left and right. The left insists that the pacifist Article 9 must remain untouched. Thats not a realistic proposition because the world has changed and Article 9 is now something of an anachronism. Its not realistic to keep it in the current environment, with Chinese ambitions and uncertainty over the USs willingness to continue contributing to regional security in the way it has done before. Its unavoidable that countries like Japan and Australia need to contribute more to help keep the status quo in place. I cant see any country in the region, with the exceptions of China and North Korea, opposing a more normal security stance by Japan. Gone are the days when south-east Asia and Australia were concerned about a revival of Japanese militarism.  In terms of Japans relations with the US, if Japan wants to maintain its alliance with the US and build security relations with others then the benefits have to go both ways. As we know, these days Washington has no time for freeloaders on security.Michael Heazle, associate professor at Griffith University in Brisbane Abes dream of change is within his grasp Liberalism is on life-support in 21st century Japan as the political centre has shifted rightward, but Yukio Edanos Constitutional Democratic party caught fire and is the Cinderella story of his election.  Edano represents principled uncompromising resistance to constitutional revision and favours repeal of the 2015 security legislation that most of the public also oppose. He will also tap into public perceptions that Abenomics is welfare for the wealthy and has caused growing disparities in Japanese society. Edano is now the torchbearer of liberalism in Japan, and even if the flame now seems flickering, his party is well positioned to expose Abes shortcomings and flaws. Abe sees that his dream (of constitutional revision) is within his grasp. Although public opinion now is not in favour of revision, if he pushes revisions through the Diet and holds a national referendum there will be a massive PR campaign to persuade the public to back the proposals. With a little help from Pyongyang and Beijing, I wager the chances are fairly good Abe can prevail.Jeff Kingston, director of Asian studies at Temple University in Tokyo Dont expect major changes Abes retention of a small supermajority makes it easier to pass a constitutional amendment bill in the lower house. But there will be no major shifts in economic policy. On security, it will remain the case that the Japan-US alliance equals good, and North Korea bad.The Party of Hope briefly emerged as a viable alternative to the ruling coalition. Suffice it to say that the Tokyo governor, Yuriko Koike, again displayed her worst traits  an inability to take counsel and a penchant for secretive decision-making - that made a disaster out of the deal that she cut with the then biggest opposition party, the Democrats. Meanwhile, Japan looks likely to limp through its early 21st century Indian summer, at least through the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. Considering what is happening in some countries in the west  of which Japan is arguably a part  it could be worse.Jun Okumura, visiting scholar at the Meiji Institute for Global Affairs Abe has no mandate - despite his landslide Because of faults in Japans first past the post electoral system there is a huge gap between public opinion on key issues and the distribution of seats in the Diet. Its hard to say that Abe has a real mandate for constitutional reform, even though the LDP won by a landslide. With such a low turnout, it isnt as if the LDP and Abe enjoy huge public support. It is yet another case of the LDP benefiting from electoral system dysfunction and a divided opposition. The constitution is the most divisive issue  its like Brexit in the UK. Its part of a global shift from interest-based politics  who gets what  to identity politics. In America, its immigration and abortion, in Britain its the EU and in Japan its the constitution. Japanese people are being asked if they are happy with postwar liberal democracy or whether they want to revive an older Japan and its values. Its a deeply emotional issue, particularly for Abe. Thats why he is talking about it, even though he already pushed through a law allowing Japan to engage in collective self-defence. Why else would he bother with the constitution, especially when there are more pressing issues such as the economy and ageing society? The coalition has the numbers in parliament, but its safe to say that the public is at least very divided on constitutional reform. It is not clear at all that Abe would win a simple majority in a national referendum (a requirement to revise the constitution). As Brexit proved, incumbent governments dont necessarily get their way in referendums.Koichi Nakano, professor of political science at Sophia University in Tokyo No progress for women in this election The election caused a lot of excitement, with the main opposition Democratic Party effectively disbanding and the emergence of two new political parties. The other story, unfortunately common but one mostly unremarked upon, is the lack of progress for women political representation. Male domination of politics in Japan is so normative and so long-standing that it is almost unremarkable. Yet, the fact that one of the worlds most economically advanced countries with a relatively strong record on human rights and women empowerment in health and education, comes last amongst OECD countries when it comes to political and economic empowerment, raises questions about democracy and equality.The long-ruling Liberal Democratic partys enduring grip on power and the low level of female political representation are not unrelated. A mere 8% of LDP candidates in Sundays election were women. women groups have been campaigning for the introduction of gender quotas as a way of addressing the gender imbalance in politics for more than 20 years, and the LDP is more consistent than any other major party in its opposition to such measures.  Indeed, a bill to encourage parties to implement internal gender quotas was effectively quashed, before having a chance to be voted on, when Shinzo Abe called the snap election. With the LDP in power again, increased attention to addressing this problem seems unlikely.Dr Emma Dalton, lecturer in Japanese at RMIT University in Melbourne  "
"10""Global fascination with the fallout from the Harvey Weinstein revelations has focused on Hollywood, as well as parallel scandals in international sport and the music industry, but the #metoo stream on Twitter has dragged attention to less glamorous workplaces, highlighting how difficult it is for women to raise these cases, even in countries with strong legislation on sexual harassment. The outrage has already prompted women in all sectors to seek legal advice about how to pursue sexual harassment claims. Were getting many more calls since the recent scandals; women are standing up in solidarity, said Silvia Stanciu, an employment attorney specialising in discrimination for New York law firm Phillips &amp; Associates. The crisis in Hollywood is merely the most eye-catching manifestation of a long-ignored problem worldwide. International research suggests workplace sexual harassment is most prevalent in sectors which rarely make headlines in this context  particularly in male-dominated areas like engineering and construction, the military, finance, transport, and in areas of minimum wage work where women are in public facing roles, care-workers going alone into peoples homes, cleaning staff in hotels, bar workers and shop assistants. But while there is some optimism that the prolonged attention concentrated on the issue may be prompting changes in attitudes, there are still huge hurdles for women around the world if they want to take sexual harassment cases to court. The most comprehensive EU-wide study on sexual harassment, (based on interviews with 42,000 women, across 28 member states, and published in 2014), showed that between 45% and 55% of women had experienced some form of sexual harassment since the age of 15. It also revealed that only 6% of women report serious sexual harassment to colleagues, only 4% contacted the police, and less than 1% spoke to a lawyer.  Lawyers point out that having strong anti-discrimination legislation is only the first step, since without proper support few women will want to risk their careers and financial security to take legal action against an employer. Basic problems of imbalance in risk remain; most crucially, employers are more likely to have legal representation than complainants. Jane Pillinger, an academic who has written reports on the international state of sexual harassment for the UNs International Labour Organisation and the TUC, said she wanted to believe that things could change because of the strength of recent anger.  Sexual harassment in the workplace was a very big issue in the 1990s, the trade unions were working on it, a lot of people were talking about it but then it just dropped off the priority list. Maybe some people felt the issue had been dealt with. Workplaces changed, nude calendars and page three pin-ups disappeared from the walls, she said, but sexual harassment never went away, it just became more hidden and more subtle. Although, with the increase in the numbers of women in the paid labour market over the last 30 years, attitudes to the problem have evolved (from the the 1970s, when according to the ILO it was seen as a widely tolerated aspect of working life, and an occupational hazard), there remains a huge reluctance to report abuse.  Women saw other women reporting, and they saw it was an absolute disaster for them, because they usually were the ones that lost their jobs, so they didnt report. The #metoo campaign has shown that women have been silent on this for decades because they know that if they complain or raise their voice, they are ridiculed or experience retaliation or discrimination in the workplace, Pillinger said. In the UK, the definition of sexual harassment was clarified by the 2010 Equality Act, and centres on behaviour that makes an individual feel humiliated, offended or degraded and on unwanted behaviour of a sexual nature, which encompasses sexual jokes, touching, and sending emails of a sexual nature or putting up pornographic pictures; a claim that a comment was meant in jest or as a compliment is not a defence. Research conducted by the Trades Union Congress last year indicated that 52% of all women had experienced some form of sexual harassment, and 80% did not report the abuse to their employer; among women and girls aged 16-24, the proportion stating they had experienced sexual harassment rose to 63%  Jane Amphlett, head of employment at the UK law firm Howard Kennedy, said she was hopeful that the Weinstein accusations would prompt a sea-change in peoples readiness to report abuse. After Weinstein, it feels like there is a groundswell of people feeling that they can speak up and say this should not be tolerated. There is force in numbers. The more perpetrators are called out about this abuse of power, the less prevalent it will become. But she also acknowledged the difficulties in coming forward. Although the law is there to protect the victims of harassment and those who speak up on their behalf, it cant always fully protect them from the consequences of putting their head above the parapet. When she advises clients on whether to pursue a case, she feels obliged to inform them of potential risks. What action they take will depend on their resilience and state of mental health, how confident they feel in their ability to raise the issue, how confident they feel in their career, and their resources to fund any potential loss of income or, if necessary, to pursue the claim. Rates of recorded sexual harassment across Europe vary in unexpected ways with much higher levels registered in Denmark, Sweden and France (it is not clear whether this is because of greater awareness of the issue or because the problems are more widespread). Some countries have devoted more attention to addressing the problem. France was one of the first countries to include sexual harassment in the criminal code; in most countries it is part of health and safety legislation, equality law or the labour code, so allegations are not dealt with under criminal law, Pillinger said. Spain has a requirement that all companies should have protocols on gender harassment, including confidential complaints committees.  The legislation in the US remains quite vague, according to David Sherwyn, a law professor and labour relations expert at Cornell University, and is hampered by the absence of a federal law against sexual harassment. The milestone Civil Rights Act 1964 prohibits employers from discriminating based on race, colour, national origin, religion or sex, via its Title VII section, but this covered basic hiring and firing in the Mad Men generation, not sexual harassment, he said. The concepts of a hostile work environment and the sex-in-return-for-advancement style of power bullying were codified later by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. For US women, there is also widespread reluctance to take cases to court. The legal process can be protracted and unpleasant, said Stanciu, the employment lawyer with Phillips &amp; Associates. Litigating sexual harassment cases can take three to eight years and if they go to court and their allegations become public, plaintiffs fear they may not be hired again. Internally, theres the stigma of being a complainer. Retaliation for bringing a complaint is illegal but its also very common, said Emily Martin, vice-president for workplace justice at the US National women Law Centre. There are real risks of burning bridges and you cant promise a women that if she brings a complaint nothing bad will happen. She said surveys showed that at a minimum one in four women experience harassment in the US workplace; only three out of 10 who experience harassment make an internal complaint, and one in 10 files a lawsuit. But she too was hopeful that the Weinstein scandal might trigger positive change. Theres a surge in women talking about harassment; employers cannot ignore this because it may turn into both a legal and PR liability, she said."
"11""French music magazine Les Inrockuptibles has been criticised as disgusting for putting Bertrand Cantat, the singer convicted of murdering his girlfriend, on its front cover. Cantat was found guilty of murdering actor Marie Trintignant in 2003 and served four years of an eight-year jail sentence. The court was told he hit Trintignant repeatedly in the head and waited for several hours before calling emergency services. She died in hospital.    Cantat en son nom: demain dans les Inrocks pic.twitter.com/aU0xyAuzUR&mdash; les inrocks (@lesinrocks) October 10, 2017    Cantat was released on parole in 2007 and is currently promoting a new album.  The decision by Inrockuptibles to make Cantat its cover star drew criticism online, with Twitter users quick to condemn the move.    So nice of Les Inrocks to have wife beater and murderer Bertrand Cantat on their cover as if he&#39;s redeemed somehow. Romain Barrilliot (@skacky) October 11, 2017      Appalled and sickened to see the murderer Bertrand Cantat on the cover of @lesinrocks to promote his new album. Beyond disgusting.&mdash; Caspar Salmon (@CasparSalmon) October 11, 2017    Frances Elle magazine responded with an editorial titled Au nom de Marie (In the name of Marie).    &quot;Au nom de Marie&quot; : notre dito pour toutes les femmes victimes de la violence des hommes pic.twitter.com/mx4cgChjSX&mdash; ELLE (@ELLEfrance) October 17, 2017    In the editorial, the magazine said, Marie Trintignant died under the blows of Bertrand Cantat. Today she is a symbol  her face has become that of all the female victims of the violence of men. The face of the 123 women killed by their spouse last year. The editorial went on to commend women who have spoken out against their attackers, saying Trintignant represented the women harassed or assaulted  216,000 complaints filed in 2016, as well as those who had come out against disgraced Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein. Les Inrockuptibles responded to criticism in a letter to its readers on Tuesday. The magazine acknowledged the timing of the cover, which was released as the Weinstein case was exploding, was inopportune, adding: The suffering that this cover may have caused deeply touched us.   Related: Bertrand Cantat is back. But should music fans boycott him? | Jessica Reed    It went on: To put him on the cover was questionable. To those who felt wounded, we express our sincere regrets. The issue of sexual violence and harassment has been making headlines in France following the Weinstein scandal.  On Sunday, French president Emmanuel Macron said he would be stripping Weinstein of the prestigious Lgion DHonneur award.  On Monday, Frances gender equality minister Marlne Schiappa announced plans for new laws aimed at cracking down on sexual violence and harassment. The proposed laws include on-the-spot fines for catcalling and lecherous behaviour in public. On Twitter, French speakers have been sharing their experiences of sexual harassment and violence under the hashtag #balancetonporc, meaning expose your pig. The first lady, Brigitte Macron, praised women for breaking the silence."
"12""Australia will be elected uncontested to the powerful United Nations human rights council on Monday in New York, as the council wrestles with rights abuses among current and prospective members. Current council member the Philippines is waging a deadly extrajudicial war on drugs that has killed at least 6,000 people, while prospective member the Democratic Republic of the Congo is riven by conflict, arbitrary arrest, torture and killings by security forces, and the persistent recruitment of child soldiers. Elections to the 47-member council will be almost entirely uncompetitive. Only among Asia-Pacific states, where six states are competing for four seats, will places be contested.  In all other geographic groupings, the number of candidates matches the number of seats.   Related: Julie Bishop expects Australia to win UN human rights council seat after France drops out    However, election is not a formality: a majority of votes cast is needed for election, and a country could be denied a spot if half of the member countries voting refuse to cast a vote for it. Australia was competing for one of two Western Europe and others group seats against Spain and France, but Frances withdrawal made Australias elevation almost certain. Australia has campaigned globally for its position on the human rights council, arguing it will promote gender equality; good governance; freedom of expression; indigenous rights; and strong national human rights institutions. It has also said it will advocate for the global abolition of the death penalty. Australia will bring a principled and pragmatic approach to our term on the human rights council, foreign minister Julie Bishop said, launching Australias bid. But Australias asylum policies  particularly boat turnbacks and offshore detention  as well as its failure to address Indigenous health, education and incarceration issues have attracted consistent criticism by UN bodies. Director of legal advocacy with the Human Rights Law Centre, Emily Howie, said Australia, compared with some other new members, would be well positioned to push for positive reforms on the human rights council. But its cruel treatment of refugees will continue to haunt and stymie Australias efforts during its term. It cant truly lead on human rights while it is blatantly breaching international law. Howie said the lack of competitive slates in the voting process was a genuine concern for the quality of membership.   Related: Asylum seeker boat turnbacks illegal and don't deter people, report finds    In a number of regions, countries with troubling records are standing unopposed. Vote trading and sliding standards will undermine the credibility of the human rights council. Australia needs to do all it can to make sure its part of the solution. Theres no place for double standards or craven failures to speak out against the type human rights atrocities currently unfolding in Myanmar. Membership of the human rights council is controversial. Saudi Arabia, which has executed more than 100 people this year, is a council member, and the Philippines, whose government is currently waging a brutal extrajudicial war on drug crime, has been warned by rights groups it risks being suspended from the council if it continues to violate human rights. A two-thirds vote by the UN general assembly is required for suspension. The countries who will be promoted for three-year terms on Monday have a mixed human rights record at best. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, riven by war for decades, security forces employ torture, rape, arbitrary arrest and extrajudicial killings, and children are forcibly recruited to fight as soldiers. Mexicos security forces have been consistently accused of extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances and torture as part of efforts to combat violent organised crime. And in Senegal, issues of child trafficking and exploitation, unlawful killing by security forces and deaths in custody, remain prevalent.  All will almost certainly earn spots on the council Monday. Human Rights Watch said the DRC Congos bid, in particular, should be rejected. Accepting Congos election bid would undermine the founding principles and credibility of the UNs top rights body and its ability to promote respect for human rights, Louis Charbonneau, UN director at Human Rights Watch, said. It would also be a serious affront to the countless victims of government abuses and to the work of courageous Congolese activists. Afghanistan, Pakistan and Qatar are also candidates for the Asia-Pacifics allocation of seats."
"13""French MPs are to debate legislation to crack down on sexist or sexual aggression and harassment, especially assaults on children.  A proposed legal bill would set down a clear age of consent for minors after a shocking case in which a rape charge was dropped when a court decided an 11-year-old girl had consented to sex with a man more than twice her age. It will also give traumatised child victims more time to come forward to bring criminal charges against their attackers. The announcement on Monday from the French equality minister, Marlne Schiappa, could hardly have come at a more appropriate time, with scores of French women coming forward to detail incidents of harassment and assault following the Harvey Weinstein scandal. A Twitter appeal by the radio journalist Sandra Muller using #balancetonporc (squeal on your pig), encouraging women to publicly shame their attackers, was top of the French Twitter trend list over the weekend. A second international campaign #MeToo is now trending in France. On Monday, Schiappa launched a pre-debate citizens consultation over the legislation, including the possibility of police warnings for everyday sexist acts such as wolf whistling and comments about physical appearance in the street.  The point is that the whole of society has to redefine what it will accept and what it will not, Schiappa told La Croix, a Catholic newspaper. The minister pointed out that there are 84,000 rapes and 220,000 sexual assaults in France each year, and one women is killed by a violent partner in the country every three days. We want to reduce those statistics for violence  All sexually motivated violence must be taken into account, including male sexual violence against small boys and disabled people. On this, we have to address another taboo, she said. Voices are being heard, in France as in other parts of the world. Society is ready to reject this violence. There is a desire to act. Police, magistrates, psychiatrists, and education and legal experts are also being solicited for their opinions, and a parliamentary commission is to study the question of harassment in public places. The information will be collated at the end of the year and a draft bill presented to the Assemble Nationale in the first half of 2018. I think, personally, that whistling at a women in the street is not harassment, but its the case when you follow her on to the subway. In this case, the stress, even intimidation, is evident, Schiappa said. A key pillar of the legislation would be an increase in the time limit for cases of sexual abuse on minors from 20 to 30 years from them reaching adulthood at 18.  Last year, Flavie Flament, a French broadcast journalist, alleged that she was raped by the British-born photographer David Hamilton 30 years previously, when she was 13. Flament said it had taken three decades for her to deal with the attack, but she was unable to bring charges because of the legal time limit. Hamilton was found dead in his Paris home having apparently killed himself after three other women made similar claims. The law would also define an age of consent for minors. The French high commission for male/female equality has suggested it be set at 13 years. Others, including Laurence Rossignol, a former family minister in the Socialist administration, are pressing for 15 years. The issue became a political priority last month following national outrage after a court reduced a charge against a 28-year-old man from rape to sexual assault because it decided the 11-year-old victim had suffered no violence, no constraint, no threat, no surprise, and could be deemed to have consented."
"14""In her job as sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins often hears middle-aged, successful women describing the sexual harassment they endured through their careers. Not always, but older women do describe what they tolerated to get where they are, she says. I dont think they intend their message to be put up with it [to succeed], but sometimes I think that is what the message is. I hope were at a turning point where people are saying, this is going on and it can change. Jenkins is responsible for overseeing the Sex Discrimination Act, which outlawed sexual harassment more than 30 years ago. The definition is broad, including leering, suggestive comments or jokes, persistent sexual insults, unwelcome requests for sex, as well as criminal offences such as obscene phone calls or sexual assault.  Harassment is unlawful where a reasonable person could foresee that their actions could offend, humiliate or intimidate. The process is designed to conciliate complaints and resolve them confidentially. Most of the laws in each state are similar. Jenkins and other experts in this area say the Harvey Weinstein scandal in the United States resonates in Australia because the experiences of women are so similar. They say, too, that were at a point where we need to acknowledge that what we have done in the past has been good, but that were at an impasse: we have strong laws, but there has been no discernible decrease in sexual harassment, even if there is a heightened awareness of it.     I dont buy into the discussions where people say, well always have sexual harassment'  Kate Jenkins     The idea that its inevitable, that women need to put up with it, especially if the harassment is at the lower end of the scale, remains pervasive. I dont buy into the discussions where people say, well always have sexual harassment, because men and women, its all about sex, says Jenkins. My answer is, Ive worked, had a long career, its managed to unfold without these situations, without every man coming across me needing to mix up his work and his pleasure. Australian women  and some men  have joined the chorus of Americans sharing their experiences under the hashtag #metoo. They are often furious messages, relaying being harassed walking along the street, at work, at university, on trains and buses. They speak of being touched, propositioned for sex and being forced to change jobs.  Academic and journalist Julie Posetti was one, writing on Facebook: #METOO. The lecherous News Editor who used to leer, make suggestive comments &amp; touch me on the arse while I was (necessarily) bending over a desk compiling bulletins. The Lord Mayor who asked said News Editor Are you fucking her? in front of me &amp; assorted others at a media event. The high profile human rights activist who insisted hed only be interviewed about his work in his hotel room  alone ... Heres to no longer staying silent. Most victims do remain silent, or share whats happening only with friends or family. Research is limited but the Australian Human Rights Commission has conducted a national prevalence survey since 2003. There has been little change. In the 2012 survey, a quarter of women experienced sexual harassment in the workplace in the previous five years, and one in six men (or 16%) of men had suffered it. Perpetrators are overwhelmingly men, but some women harass, too. Harassment doesnt just happen at work  women in particular routinely put up with street cat-calling and unwanted advances on public transport  but the majority of formal complaints involve workplaces.  The commission is about to conduct another survey. Formal complaints go up and down each year but have gradually increased. In 2006/07, there were 186 complaints. Last year, there were 247.  We had a lot of progress in the 60s and 70s in Australia culminating in strong laws in the 80s in sex discrimination, says Jenkins. People assume we are doing really well now [but] in practice we havent made all of the progress that we expected. From a bad joke to something more serious She says many young people have different expectations than older people, they do expect standards of behaviour that are more fair to men and women. But they have watched what happens when a person complains, and weigh up whether its worth it.  A recent example was cadet reporter Amy Taeuber losing her job with Channel Seven in Adelaide after she complained about a senior producer making repeated sexual remarks to her. (Seven denies that was the reason for her dismissal).      Channel Seven journalist Amy Taeuber. Photograph: Guardian    What seems to have changed is awareness, with a raft of reports and mea culpas from institutions. Jenkins, while head of the Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission, oversaw a 2015 report into Victoria police, which found an entrenched culture of sexual harassment. Last year, the Australian federal police released a report showing that 46% of women employees and 20% of men had been sexually harassed in the workplace in the past five years. It was a boys club, said the then sex discrimination commissioner Elizabeth Broderick.  This year, a report on sexual harassment and assault at Australian universities found that 51% of students had been sexually harassed in 2016, whether on or off campus. Some of the harassment was minor  leering or a bad joke  and some was more serious. The problem, says Jenkins, is that Australia has set up an approach to complaints that has had perverse outcomes. A Rolls-Royce investigation process is offered as the solution for every issue. Theres not a mechanism to stop the small stuff, and yet the tolerance of the small stuff creates the environment that lets the big stuff happens.  The mechanism to require a victim who is most probably more junior to raise concerns about the conduct hasnt worked because it is a very difficult thing to do. Women and men have learned it can jeopardise your career, you might be the one seen as the trouble maker. One thing that has changed, says employment lawyer Josh Bornstein, is that if the employer fails to deal with a complaint and conciliation also collapses, courts are treating cases much more seriously. When I started practising in the employment and discrimination law area, the awards of damages to women who experienced sexual harassment, if they were able to succeed in their case, were pathetically low.  But that has changed. The courts have started to recognise only in the last three or four years that sexual harassment can be extremely damaging and theyve started to award much more significant damages.  He says a landmark case was the full bench of the federal courts decision in 2014. A female employee of technology giant Oracle was sexually harassed by a male worker for six months. The original judgment awarded the women $18,000 in damages, but the full court increased it to $130,000, in part because of changing community understanding of the damage and loss of enjoyment of life harassment could cause.  The cost of complaining Professor Sara Charlesworth from RMIT researches sexual harassment and has found a trend towards lawyering up, even in the early stages of conciliation hearings, and despite legal representation being discouraged in the human rights commission process. Employers are more likely to have legal representation than a complainant.  Weve got good laws, Charlesworth said. But weve legalised our conciliation processes in a way that they were never intended to be legalised. People are likely now to think they need a lawyer and I think the average price for conciliation is about $3,000. What young persons got that? In research yet to be published, Charlesworth has found there were only 41 court cases of sexual harassment that reached a decision in Australia between 2009 and 2015. She argues the focus now should be on cultural change within workplaces, particularly in educating bystanders. While the Weinstein case is the classic example of a powerful man exploiting a younger women, a lot of harassment occurred between co-workers, and can be less serious, but still damaging. Bystanders are very important. Letting people know how to call out bad behaviour, so its not always on the person experiencing it. If you see someone deliberately brushing past them, or making lewd comments to them, or making personal remarks, [you say], thats not really on, thats not how we treat people in this workplace.    If youre able to train up your bystanders, thats much more powerful.  Sara Charlesworth, RMIT professor     If youre able to train up your bystanders, thats much more powerful and that addresses the systemic gender discrimination that really underpins most sexual harassment. Jenkins agrees the critical change now needs to be cultural. She acknowledges this can be a confusing area in some cases, with men still expected to take the lead in making sexual approaches to women and the possibility of misunderstanding. But she said women rarely complain unless the harassment is serious and persistent, and the culture of a workplace can change the dynamic. Workplaces need to change their tolerance levels and that actually has more impact if managers, men in particular, bystanders and peers speak up when something inappropriate happens. That changes the tone and that reduces the prevalence of sexual harassment. Bornstein says about 90% of the cases his firm, Maurice Blackburn, takes on settle before court. Employers are not necessarily more enlightened, but are more aware of the damage to their reputation publicity can cause. Last year for instance, Fairfax Media quickly let go the editor in chief of the Age, Mark Forbes, after a complaint by a young women about his behaviour at a work function. We need radical change to turn around the way in which men mistreat women, says Bornstein. As I age, I see more and more of these cases, I just realise how entrenched gender discrimination is. Weve had decades of really good workplace policies, various waves of reform in workplaces and awareness campaigns and complaint campaigns, but the cases still come in strong numbers. The answer is multi-faceted and has to be a radical approach to gender equality. He says one way to start would be to make paternity leave compulsory for men, to make fathers stay home for a time to look after children. It just might shift things a little, he says. He knows its a glib response, but something has to change."
"15""   They arrived in sequins and feathers, six-inch heels and pancake makeup. They arrived, too, in T-shirts and hiking boots, frocking up for no one. There were walking sticks and wheelchairs, a blind man with a guide dog, a women with a shirt saying This is what an old lesbian looks like. This was their night, and theyd come as they please. In the midst of a survey on same-sex marriage that feels to many like a judgment on the equality of gays and lesbians, here was a night to celebrate those who had come of age when in the closet was all but compulsory.  Here were people who remembered when homosexuality was illegal, when transgender people were shunned, who had come out when it was an act of courage, who had nursed the dying through the scourge of Aids.     People entering the Coming Back Out ball at Melbourne Town Hall. Photograph: The Guardian     All photographs by Meredith OShea for the Guardian      Friends wait outside Melbourne Town Hall. Photograph: The Guardian       A couple wait out side Melbourne Town Hall for the doors to open. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian       Ladies wait outside Melbourne Town Hall. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian     Related: 'It just felt so right': same-sex weddings  a photo essay    The inaugural Coming Back Out Ball at Melbournes Town Hall on Saturday night was for LGBTI elders, a dinner and concert hosted by the redoubtable Robyn Archer, with singers, musicians and performers serenading the oldies. For the over 65s, it was free. Tristan Meecham, the artistic director of the performance group All the Queens Men, worked for two years to make this happen. He stood on a stage in a sharp suit and towering platform shoes. I stand before you as a young gay man, he said. We offer this night as a gift in appreciation and respect for all you have done  for fighting for my right to wear these six-inch heels and nail polish.     A couple outside. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian     Shea The Guardian .071017 . People entering the Coming back out ball at the Melbourne Town Hall . Tristan Meecham Artistc director and Nance Peck steal a moment for soem familiar banter.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"674\" class=\"gu-image\" />  People entering the Coming Back Out ball. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian       A couple hold hands excitedly outside Melbourne Town Hall. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian       Russell Vickery at the Coming Back Out ball. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian    Humour and outrageousness have always accompanied resistance. Comedian Gerry Connolly, resplendent as Queen Elizabeth, opened proceedings with my fellow Queens, lesbians, faghags and enlightened hets. She noted that in November, she and Prince Philip will have been married for 70 years and if Lizzie can marry, lezzies can marry. Indeed, LGBTI truly stood for Let God Bless the Queen, Intermittently. Cowboys in pink hats and tight shorts strutted their stuff. Carlotta, a 74-year-old boiler, said she had fought for equality since opening the cabaret show Les Girls in 1963. Ive seen it all, she sang, and Im still here. There was poignancy throughout, a tender acknowledgment that amid the diversity, all of them had had publicly come out at some point, painfully or otherwise. The shadow of the same-sex marriage survey was the thread, the latest skirmish in a long struggle for equality.     Performer Jarred Dewy. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian       Performers on stage. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian       A performer dressed as the Queen. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian       Aboriginal opera singer Deborah Cheetham. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian    Indigenous soprano Deborah Cheetham, in full blowsy opera gown, was accompanied by her partner Toni Lalich. She raised the roof with an adapted rendition of Dont Cry for Me Argentina: A message for Cory and Tony and Lyle/ I just want you to know I dont hate you at all/ I cant be bothered/ This truth is, Im tired of waiting/ Our love is equal, or may be more so/ When you say yes Australia, Ill marry my darling Toni.     Dancing at the Coming Back Out ball. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian       Dancing at the Coming Back Out ball. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian       Dancing at the Coming Back Out ball. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian       A couple kiss at the Coming Back Out ball. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian    Getting old as an LGBTI person can be lonesome. Aged care facilities are catching up, but there remains discrimination and misunderstanding. Transgender seniors can feel isolated and fearful. For one night at least, this was one community.  It feels like coming home, said Liz Craig, 69, a nurse for 50 years. Im just overwhelmed with joy and pride.  Its wonderful, said David Morrison, 87. I had no idea it would be like this. As the DJ played Young Hearts Run Free, Liz and her friends took to the dancefloor. Old they may be, but not past it. They bopped until the end, until the last song. It was We Are Family, and on this night, it was perfect.      David Morrison. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian    David Morrison, 87  When David Morrisons wife Margaret died 11 years ago, his daughter Anne-Marie asked him, Dad, are you gay?  I said yes. Morrison was in his mid-70s and had lived a life of secrecy and shame. On Saturday night, he was a gay elder celebrated at the Coming Back Out Ball, a slight dapper man with a hearing aid, red bow tie and a pocket handkerchief.    He took off his uniform and he had the most beautiful body  I was flabbergasted  David Morrison     Morrison recalls his life with no bitterness. He was born in depression-era Melbourne to devout Catholic parents. Sex was never spoken about. Homosexuality was unheard of. He remembers as a young man being aloof, a little different, but he never understood why. I had a couple of infatuations about guys, never about girls, he says. But it never occurred to me, I hadnt heard of homosexuality. I thought I was the only one. It was hurting me terribly because I was so full of guilt. Hormones were raging, and here am I, just about every week going to confession to confess my sins. It was pathetic. I was wanking off and that was a mortal sin. I could go to hell for that and thats what I believed. Yet Morrison loved the Catholic church, the hierarchy of it, the rituals, the colour, the shape it gave his life. At aged 19, he started training to become a Catholic brother in New South Wales. He left before his training was complete because it didnt feel right and joined the air force in 1952 as an instrument fitter. I liked the air force, there were all these men there. He remembers seeing an air force colleague undressing. He took off his uniform and he had the most beautiful body. I was struck, I was flabbergasted, I had to look away. Morrison was a 34-year-old virgin when he married a strict Catholic women, Margaret. The couple had two daughters. It was a disaster, he says. What I thought marriage would be was not that at all. As a man, I would have liked to have sex for sexs sake, but she wasnt a soul mate, you know. I loved Margaret, I would give my life for her but we were unsuited to each other. In the 1980s, he learned about the Aids epidemic and applied to be trained to help people with HIV. My wife hated the idea, she could sense something. He had a discreet affair with a man. After Margaret died, Morrison began living openly as a gay man. He met Colin about four years ago. They were both elderly by then, and they had lunch together, even cutting each others hair. We might play around a bit, he says, but mostly they were companions. Colin died a few weeks ago, so Morrison went to Saturday nights ball alone. I realise that no matter what, Ive come out OK, all is forgiven, he says. I have no regrets, no thought of revenge. I did what I thought was OK, Margaret did, my parents did, too. I have all the money I need, a house, two daughters and five grandchildren. If same-sex marriage was legal, he doesnt think it would appeal to him, even if he were a younger man. I voted emphatically yes [in the postal survey], but its not for me. Ideally, I think Id have gone for a few partners. Even when I go into town now, theres some wonderful looking men around.     Tristan Meecham and Liz Craig. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian    Liz Craig, 69  Young Australians know little about the horrors of the Aids epidemic that began in the early 1980s, but Liz Craig remembers it. Craig was a nurse with the Royal District Nursing Service, which even in the anxious early days cared for patients with HIV, the virus that can lead to Aids. She remembers the fear of being infected. Ambulance workers were reluctant to pick up patients, people were frightened of hugging a patient with HIV or Aids, or kissing them, or sharing a glass of water with them. The nurses had a code for HIV  A100 they called it  because people feared the repercussions if it was acknowledged. She remembers the prejudice.    When I was little, sex was never talked about  Liz Craig     This was seen as a gay disease, Craig says. I had nurses who would not care for them because it was Gods punishment. If you had anal sex you deserved HIV. For Craig, working with HIV patients was a way to serve her LGBTI community after a long personal journey. The childhoods of many older gays and lesbians  and heterosexuals  were imbued with sexual ignorance. For many too, the church was the dominate moral influence and it too instilled fear. Craig came by boat from England to Australia in 1950 when she was 11. Her parents were 10-pound Poms, and Craig and her two sisters grew up above a hairdressing shop in Camberwell in Melbourne. Her parents were devout Church of England worshippers, very strict and incredibly religious. I never thought about it when I was little, sex was never talked about, never. God could see everything, if you masturbated God could see that, she says. Even just personal things, like having your period, you were told that you had become a women, but you werent told what that was. That was how it was in the day. Nursing training at the old Austin hospital was a very steep learning curve and a lasting one. She still sees the women she trained with 50 years ago. Life proceeded in a conventional way. She started dating a man and they got married. They had a daughter, Rebecca. Somewhere along the line, she says, I was unhappy in my marriage. Somewhere in my life I thought that maybe I would like to be with a women. I toed and froed a bit. A lot of married people do, but I found with women I had a spiritual connection that was very important to me. The couple separated, not because of her sexuality, but because they had grown apart. She had a relationship with a women, but then married a second time because I tried to conform with my family. The marriage was difficult and she separated again. When Rebecca was around 18, Craig told her that she was a lesbian. I came out, and never went back. Rebecca was pretty pissed off. She was my joy, still is, shes everything to me. I think she was a bit jealous; how could another women be in my life? I was her women, mother daughter stuff, but she quickly came around and shes been my mainstay. Craig is wary of being categorised. I dont think about myself as any label at all. I love the person I love, but I prefer to be with a women. Her longest relationship with a women lasted 10 years and it was soul-destroying when it ended. She wants same-sex marriage to be legalised, but has little interest in it personally. I was asked to get married by a women, and I said No, I dont believe in the institution of marriage. Its not that I love that person any less, but why do I need that piece of paper? If same-sex marriage is legalised, though, shed love to be a marriage celebrant. The drive for same-sex marriage could never have happened if gays had not fought to be treated as equal during the Aids crisis, she says. Ive seen young men die because theyre gay and have HIV and because their parents disowned them  some of them didnt want to know they had HIV or Aids. Ive seen young people die on their own which is soul-destroying. I know all the things they fought for  confidentiality, more drugs, help in the community, housing. We have been the forefathers to set this road for same-sex marriage. There would have been no such thing without us doing the hard work.     Gordon Wilson. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian    Gordon Wilson, 81  Gordon Wilson always knew he was gay. When he was a boy in Western Australia he loved dancing  anything with Gene Kelly or Fred Astaire  and wanted to learn ballet. At 14, he asked his father, Richard, a survivor of the Burma railway during the second world war, if he could take lessons.  And Dad said, everybody will call you a sissy. I said, I am, so what? So Dad said, OK, off you go. His parents were always supportive of him. His sister set up a Facebook group recently to encourage family and friends to vote yes in the same-sex marriage postal survey. Ive had a charmed life, he says.    If anybody comes to me and says they are gay, I  say you will have a great life'. All you have to do is accept yourself  Gordon Wilson     Not that it was an easy life. Wilson was bullied at school  I fought back and they left me alone. He was badly beaten in the early 1960s by a group of young men in Melbourne and his damaged right eye is a permanent reminder of it. But mostly, Wilson remembers a fabulous scene in the 1960s. There was the Hotel Australia and the London Hotel in the city and if there wasnt a party at one of them, youd go around the corner to the other. The cultural life was booming, he says. Every generation thinks theyre the first ones to do it, but excuse me, weve all done it all before. [Homosexuality] was still illegal, we were criminals, but we had some huge parties. American war ships came in and we entertained the sailors and they entertained us back on board for lunch. Wilson worked at bars and in retail, and for 23 years at the Victorian Aids Council. He recalls handing out thousands of safe sex packs during the HIV epidemic in the 1980s, and he cared for many dying gay men. One of them I was with quite a while and I had to sit with him while he died, which was fine, I could do it, he says. There were other people who were dying all around me and I was going to funerals. One of the guys at the council said to me, Gordon, youre getting to the end of your tether, you need to see someone so I went and saw a wonderful counsellor. He and his partner, George, were watching a news item some years ago about the possibility of same-sex marriage being passed in Australia. I just turned to him and said, If we could get married, would you marry me? Without a blink of an eye he said, Yes of course. I said righto, OK. It was just out of the blue. You dont have to get married but you have a right to get married. Wilson has some advice for young gay people. If anybody comes to me at 14 or 15 and says they are gay, I would say You will have a great life. All you have to do is accept yourself, and everything will be fine. And its true, self-acceptance is the big thing.      Trace Williams Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian    Trace Williams Trace Williams never declares her age to anyone, but she is an intersex elder, a person born at a time when the idea of a newborn who was neither obviously male nor female was terrifying for parents and doctors. Her life has had more than its share of pain, but resilience is there, too. She strides into the Coming Back Out Ball, tall and lanky, dressed in black boots, fishnet stockings and short shorts, the fringe of her long hair dyed pink. As she says, shes just Trace now, and comfortable with that.    My father was very bitter towards me, and because of that I ended up in a childrens home  Trace Williams     She was born in Ballarat in country Victoria to a family of Jehovahs Witnesses. She was named Graeme, undergoing operations to make her appear more like a boy, and prescribed male hormones in adolescence. My familys attitude was not very kind, she says. My father was very bitter towards me, and because of that I ended up in a childrens home in Ballarat. My relationship with my mother was very strained. When my father passed away, I actually found cards that related to me, which said things like, So disappointed that you didnt get your little girl. Sorry, Hal, but you got an it. As long as you had one Y chromosome you were assigned a male [gender]. It didnt matter what genitalia you had. I was bought up as a boy because I had chromosomes that were different to the standard male or female, but there was a Y chromosome in there and thats what they did in those days.  The trauma of growing up as intersex a generation ago is there in Traces voice. Its a story of sexual abuse, of a childhood as a state ward, of involvement with the juvenile justice system, of cruelty at work and mental health problems. It was striving to be yourself as an intersex person in a country town. In the LGBTI alphabet, I is for intersex, but Williams wonders if it should be invisible. People with an intersex condition can be misunderstood within the queer community and still face legal hurdles and medical intrusion. In March this year, Williams was one of more than 20 intersex advocates from Australia and New Zealand who met and developed a declaration of policy goals. The Darlington Statement, as it is known, had as its centrepiece the prohibition on surgery to alter the sex characteristics of infants and children without consent unless it is medically necessary. The norm for intersex people is that they are struggling all their lives to be recognised, that they are no different from any other person. But because of the way they are, they have special health needs and those health needs are not being met, she says. Williams now lives as a women with her partner Jane Dodge. She doesnt feel defined by being intersex and has managed to succeed in life, becoming financially independent along the way. The couple are setting up a hotel and art gallery in country Victoria. Williams knows that she can be mistaken for a trans women, but it doesnt worry her. Im not into the stereotypes like John and Betty, she says. I really like this person [Jane] for who she is. Jane is Jane and Trace is Trace. If someone has a problem with me, its their problem.      Nance Peck. Photograph: Meredith O'Shea for the Guardian    Nance Peck, 76  I always say to people Im BC and BS. They say, whats that? I say, before contraception and before superannuation. Nance Peck defies stereotypes. She was born in Bundaberg in Queensland in 1940, came out as a lesbian in the 1970s, and now shes not so sure.    The only man who I had really good sex with, he turned out years later to be gay as well  we laughed ourselves silly  Nance Peck     At the age of 76, in an era of gender fluidity, she prefers to think of herself as non-binary. In part, its to defy the attitudes towards the elderly, to break out of the box. She lifts her hat to show that her hair is grey, and says how much she resents the assumptions as she gets older that shes a compliant granny. Change is happening, she says. One of the reason why I decided to come out of my comfort zone and speak now that Im not in paid work is that Ive still got an overactive brain. I have to do something with it, so Ive decided Im a thinker. Pecks family was poor and her father beat her. She was an angry child and poured her energies into sport. She was known as a tomboy but never thought about sexuality. I was born in the time of ignorance is what I call it, she says. I didnt know you got periods until I got them, and I didnt recover from the shock of that for quite a while. I didnt really find out about sexuality until the 1960s when I went to Sydney. In the 1970s, it was mandatory to try everything. And I thought Im not going to die a shrivelled up old prune, so I tried all the different things, groups and all sorts of stuff. The only man who I had really good sex with, he turned out years later to be gay as well  we laughed ourselves silly.   Related: The marriage campaign has mobilised thousands to fight for equality | Dennis Altman    Peck left school at 15 and joined the public service and later, the Queensland police in 1965, a pioneering women in the force. She later put herself through year 12 studies and university. Before she retired, she worked with community legal centres in Melbourne, particularly on domestic violence and prison reform. The last few years have seen crushing health problems, and a struggle to work out a way to slow down a little, while still contributing. She has had lung cancer and major surgery, but remains an activist. Her oldest friend, Trisha, asked her once whether she would always be a radical. I said I hope so. The last few years of life has been about learning to have the same energy about life and politics and the world and thinking and how to slow it down. Im training myself to be slower and she [Trisha] said, Id like to see that.   This article was amended on 11 October 2017 to correct the name of Carlotta, from Carlotto as an earlier version said."
"16""The first time Shivangi Choubey missed the curfew at her student hostel was a night in late September. It was not the only rule she broke that day. Women students at Banaras Hindu University are not supposed to protest. Many are made to sign a contract that spells this out explicitly. Men are not required to sign anything of the kind. Nor, at many hostels on campus, are women served meat, permitted to speak on the phone after 10pm, or allowed out in the evenings when their male counterparts still roam the tree-lined campus on sputtering two-wheelers or cram into the library to study.   Related: Holi festival: Delhi women forced into lockdown amid sexual harassment fears    So it was especially shocking  and unprecedented in the universitys 100-year history  when Choubey led 200 women through the gates of their college to join hundreds of others assembled outside Lanka gate, the campuss bustling entrance. Nobody ever misses a curfew, she says, pulling a scarlet shawl around her shoulders. Thats something very big for us. But we were so agitated, because these things keep happening to us. The day before, an undergraduate student walking home from her department said she had been sexually assaulted by two men on a motorbike. Campus security guards had been sitting in plastic chairs about 20 metres away but did nothing, the women said. She told others that the warden at her college had dismissed the incident, telling her: They just touched you. They didnt do anything serious. These comments were a spark on already burning logs, says Dhriti Dharana, a psychology student living at the same college as the alleged victim. We thought, to hell with everything. Were going to protest. The days of demonstrations that followed have brought one of Indias most prestigious and conservative universities to its knees. Its vice-chancellor is on indefinite leave. The head of security resigned. Colleges were emptied of students  evacuated, one said  days earlier than a scheduled holiday after footage of police using batons against young women went viral, drawing national condemnation. Banaras Hindu University, sprawling across hundreds of hectares in the holy city of Varanasi, is an unlikely site for a rebellion. Many of the women on the bikes that ply its quiet, lushly vegetated roads wear modest traditional clothing and gamchas, cotton towels, over their faces. Until this year women and men took segregated classes in the universitys large and renowned arts and social science departments.     Shivangi Choubey, an English student at Banaras Hindu University who helped lead recent protests. Photograph: Michael Safi for the Observer    The university is a magnet for the brightest students from impoverished regions such as Bihar and eastern Uttar Pradesh, often the first in their families to attend college, eager for a foothold in the Indian middle class. Students laugh when asked if anyone drinks on campus. Only in secret, says Dharana, grinning. We take a birthday cake down the Ganga [Ganges] ghats. Thats how we party. In part, this conservatism reflects many of the students own values. But it is also rigorously enforced. It is scary, very scary, to be a women here, says Choubey, 21. Eve-teasing  a south Asian euphemism for sexual harassment  is rampant on campus, she says. It happens to everyone. Boys go about on their bikes and they touch your dupatta [shawl], they grab your clothes, they speak shit about you, they abuse you in slang language. One popular form of harassment is for men to label a women bhabhi, or brothers wife. It means the girl has been set up with a guy in their group, Choubey says. The girl is the property of that guy. So every time his friends see me around, they call him and say, bhabhi was here, bhabhi was with another guy. And then the guy I was with gets beaten up. She can instantly recall the last time she was harassed. A few days ago, she says. I was going through the campus. It was 7pm. I was with a friend and two guys came by on a bike and called me a prostitute. There is no girl who hasnt faced this problem on campus. Inside their residential hostels, women students see a different side of the patriarchy  the one claiming to protect them. Starkly divergent rules for mens and women hostels are a fact of life at many Indian universities. Such discrimination has sparked a national protest movement called Pinjra Tod  Break the Cage  as well as a supreme court challenge. At Mineshi Mishras college, women are banned from talking on the phone late at night. In my first year my phone was taken away because I&#xa0;was talking to a friend. It&#xa0;was&#xa0;11pm, says the slight psychology student, peering hard over her square glasses.     Lanka gate, the bustling main entrance to the campus in Varanasi, Indias holiest Hindu city. Photograph: Michael Safi for the Observer    They shamed me for it. They started asking me personal questions publicly. Like, the name and number of the person I was speaking to. What kind of relationship I had with him. It was weird. It was very&#xa0;embarrassing. When reports that a student had been sexually assaulted on 21&#xa0;September began to spread, Dharana, 23, said women were angry, but did not initially plan to protest. Every girl at the university has been Eve-teased, molested, from the second she stepped on campus, she says. It was when they heard the security guards and hostel staff had failed to act  and worse, apparently shrugged off the incident  that the campus ignited. These people are supposed to look after us, but they are against us, Dharana says. That is what erupted this thing. By the second night of protests, more than 1,000 people had massed outside Lanka gate and the vice-chancellors residence, most of them students, and a majority of them women. The vice-chancellor, Girish Chandra Tripathi, has claimed he was trying to meet with students to contain the unrest when people started throwing petrol bombs and stones. (The students say their protests were peaceful and any violence was perpetrated by outsiders.) At some point, the khaki-clad police elected to charge the crowd several times with batons, corralling the students into their colleges and shutting the gates, injuring several in the process. By the next day, footage of male police officers striking young women was being broadcast across the Indian media. The outrage was fanned by a series of car-crash interviews by Tripathi in the following days, in which he denied any problem with sexual harassment on campus, defended the baton charge against criminals, and told the Indian Express: If we are going to listen to every demand of every girl, we wont be able to run the university. The difficulties faced by Indian women  amply illustrated by evidence of their diminishing contribution to the workforce, lagging literacy rates, and the frequency with which they are murdered as infants  have become part of the global narrative about the country since the 2012 rape and murder of a Delhi physiotherapy student. Less well known are myriad examples, especially since the Delhi attack, of women in India asserting their right to worship, loiter, divorce or live free from violence.   Related: Indian women wear cow masks to ask: are sacred cattle safer than us?    Women are speaking up, young girls are speaking up, they are protesting, says Professor Reicha Tanwar, from the women Studies Research Centre at Kurukshetra University. They know that sexual violence is against the law  earlier they were not even aware. Since last months protests, Banaras Hindu University has appointed a new head of security  the first women to hold the job. She has promised to relax women curfews and restrictions on food, alcohol and clothing. Mishra and other students welcome the appointment, but caution: What we are fighting for is not complete. Those two nights of rebellion will not eradicate sexual harassment from the university, nor the gauntlet of taunts, stares and worse that Indian women face outside its gates. The women are back inside their hostels by 8pm each night. But inside their minds, Mishra says, something has shifted. We stayed sitting out there despite the curfew timings, she says. We did not go back to our hostels. The fear which was inside our heads  that broke up. And that was the best thing about the movement."
"17""The European commission is to push for a quota for women on company boards to address the slow progress to gender equality in the senior ranks of publicly listed businesses. Under the proposals, companies whose non-executive directors are more than 60% male would be required to prioritise women when candidates of equal merit were being considered for a post. Previous attempts by the EUs executive to set a 40% goal for women in the top ranks of listed companies have been blocked by Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden overs fears that Brussels was overreaching into domestic affairs. Hungary and Poland have opposed the move on ideological grounds. The result of the impasse has been slow progress to greater diversity at the top of companies. Women made up 29% of recruits to UK boards in 2016, down from 32.1% in 2014 and 31.6% in 2012, according to research by the recruiter Egon Zehnder.   Related: White men 'endangered species' in UK boardrooms, says Tesco chairman    The proportion of women on the boards of the largest listed companies across the EU has more than doubled, from 10% in 2005 to 22% in 2015. However, women account for only 7% of board chairs and presidents and 6% of chief executives in the largest companies. On Monday, the commissioner for justice and gender equality, Vra Jourov, will publish proposals to redress the gender pay gap. Speaking to the Guardian before the launch, Jourov said: We have so much evidence that it is good for business to have diversity, to have women and men on boards. Women [make up] 65% of university graduates, so why dont we use that talent and the investment? Women have a very good talent for long-term, sensible spending [and] for crisis-solving because they can come up with proposals for negotiation and compromise. It is a necessary balance to the approach of men: attack and escape. A quota for boards will be one of a series of legislative proposals aimed at tightening the law to improve diversity and pay practices in work. The pay gap in the EU, quantifying the difference in average hourly pay for male and female workers, remains resolutely large. According to figures released in October, Britain registered the biggest increase in the EUs gender pay gap in 2015. The UKs gender pay gap jumped from 19.7% in 2014 to 20.8% in 2015, the largest annual rise among Europes main economies. The gap in the UK now outstrips the EUs average of 16.3%. Jourov, the Czech Republics representative in the commission, said: In each country there are special reasons for this. I think that in most member states, maybe all, the main problem is segregated jobs. Females jobs, nurses, social services, teachers are underpaid. And is it because women are working in these roles? Maybe. I would guess this is also the case with the UK and [it is] something they should think about. We are addressing the member states with a strong call to look into it and change their renumeration policy in the public sector. The gender pay gap is also partly caused because women have more duties at home and take part-time jobs. And are paid less. It is a trap. Across the EU there is a full-time equivalent employment rate of 40% for women and 56% for men. Jourov said she believes discrimination is still a major factor, and that current EU legislation is ineffective because it is not strongly enforced. Jourov has also suggested legislation to force listed companies to publish gender-specific statistics on pay. There are no teeth [to current laws], she said. According to our estimates, discrimination accounts for 8-10% of the gap. There is not enough enforcement. It must be done by labour inspectorates, and it should be captured in collective bargaining by the trade unions."
"18""Forget Brexit. Europe is facing an even more fundamental crisis: one of its major languages is en pril mortel (in mortal danger). If you take the French Academy at its word, within a few years 70 million EU citizens will be communicating using only grunts  or grognements, as they will no longer be able to say. The cause? Political correctness gone mad, as usual. The academy, which is charged with the Canute-like task of preventing the French language from changing very much, is furious at the use of inclusive language, which attempts to get around the assumption of male superiority baked into French grammar. Because French, like many other languages, requires nouns referring to people to have masculine or feminine endings, if youre describing a mixed-gender group, youre forced to pick one. By convention, its the masculine. So a group of, say, six MPs  one man and five women  would be called dputs, not dputes. One way to deal with this is to have an alternative form that covers everyone: dput-e-s.   Related: French language watchdogs say 'non' to gender-neutral style    Thats what the academy is railing against. But the idea that it places French in mortal danger, as its statement argues? Have these people gone compltement fou? Its an optional shorthand, used only in print. It may be relevant at this point to raise the fact that, of the 34 academicians, 30 are male. Apart from the gender imbalance, theres the academys mission according to its 17th-century statutes: to make the language pure. Talk about setting yourself up to fail  or at least to get angry about things that you cant change. Languages are always impure: they borrow, blend and innovate, without any loss of expressive power. One radical solution, of course, is for members of the academy to become reformers rather than reactionaries, and eliminate masculine and feminine forms altogether. Plenty of languages, including English, Turkish or Thai, get along perfectly well without them. And the French have done radical things with language before, such as scrapping the names of days of the week during the revolution. People of France, you have nothing to lose but your gender markings!"
"19""The Acadmie Franaise, Frances ultimate authority on the French language, is under fierce attack for describing gender-neutral text as an aberration that puts the language in mortal danger. The Immortals, as the 40 academy members  only five of whom are women  are known, have sparked a national row after declaring that inclusive writing has no place in the countrys grammar books, or anywhere else for that matter. In a statement full of hyperbole, the academy condemned the increasing use of new spellings aimed at making written French less masculine, arguing that it could not see the desired objective of the changes. French grammatical rules give the masculine form of a noun precedence over the female. Women on an all-female board of company directors are called directrices; if one man joins the board, they are referred to collectively as directeurs. Inclusive writing has them written as directeurtrices or directeur-trice-s  admittedly more clumsy but representing both forms of the word. The word students becomes tudiantes; a gender-mixed group of actors would be written acteurtrices.   Related: Not the oignon: fury as France changes 2,000 spellings and drops some accents    For years, French presidents have addressed citizens as les Franais et les Franaises instead of the strictly correct les Franais, but the recent row was sparked by a new textbook aimed at primary school children that employs the inclusive style, and came into use for the first time this year. After a vote last month, the Acadmie Franaise issued a unanimous non to the new style, deeming it far too complicated. Faced with the aberration of inclusive writing, the French language finds itself in mortal danger, its statement read. We find it hard to identify the desired objective and how to overcome the practical obstacles of writing and reading  both visually and out loud  and pronunciation. This will increase the burden for teachers and even more so for readers. Supporters of inclusive writing say the new forms are aimed at use in written communication, not speech or literature. They also point out the Acadmie is hardly a model of gender equality.  Established by Louis XIIIs chief minister Cardinal Richelieu in 1635, outlawed after the French Revolution and restored by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1803, there have been a total of 726 members, only eight of whom have been women. The first, Belgian-born novelist Marguerite Yourcenar, was elected in 1980.   Related: The French protect their language like the British protect their currency | Andrew Gallix    In 2014, the academy opposed the feminisation of job titles, making Paris mayor Anne Hidalgos subsequent insistence on being called Madame la Maire (and not Madame le Maire) grammatically incorrect. Eliane Viennot, professor of literature at Jean-Monnet University in St-tienne and author of the book Non le masculin ne lemporte pas sur le fminin! (No the masculine does not take precedence over the feminine!), said: They [the academy] are extremely conservative. If you ask people to list their favourite crivains (writers) they will only mention male authors, Viennot told France24 television. Its not until you ask them to list their favourite crivains and crivaines that they think of women. In an opinion piece in Libration, she called for France to pull the plug on the academy. For 30 years they have never stopped trying to torpedo any evolution of the French language towards equality, Viennot wrote.  Last month the education minister, Jean-Michel Blanquer, who described himself as a feminist man, opposed the use of the new style and said the row over it was useless.  We must return to the basics of vocabulary and grammar and this just adds an unnecessary complication, Blanquer told BFMTV. In 2015, Frances High Council for Equality between Women and Men, published a guide encouraging public officials to adopt forms of communication without sexual stereotypes."
"20""Australian women earn only 78% of a mans average full-time pay despite greater employer focus on gender equality in the workplace, an annual scorecard has revealed.  It also found there has been little change in the proportion of women sitting on company boards over the past three years and women remain underrepresented in management, occupying 16.5% of available roles.  Australias gender equality scorecard detailed the fourth year of data reported by businesses to the Workplace Gender Equality Agency (WGEA), comprising information on more than four million employees and 11,000 employers.  It found there was very little improvement in the gender pay gap (a drop of 0.7%), female managerial appointments (a rise of 0.8%) or female representation on boards and governing bodies (a rise of 0.2%). On average, men earn $26,527 more than women each year, it said. In the top levels of management that difference rose to $89,216. The biggest gender pay gap in favour of men was in technician and trade roles, but every managerial and occupational category had a disparity.   Related: Australian women lifetime earnings less than two-thirds of men's     The answer was greater awareness and vigilance by companies, the report suggested. We need to concentrate and continue to implore organisations to look at their own data and conduct their own pay gap analysis and to take action on the pay gap in their organisation because they can control that, said the WGEAs director, Libby Lyons. Until organisations analyse their own pay data, they wont know what they wont know.  The proportion of employers who had conducted a gender pay gap analysis rose by more than 10 percentage points to 37.7% and more than 55% said they took action on the results.  The most common forms of action were identifying the cause, reporting metrics to executives and reviewing decision-making processes. One in four organisations said they took no action because their analysis found no gender pay gaps.  Im very encouraged by the strong improvement that were seeing in employer action, said Lyons. To see that sort of jump in a year really encourages me.   Related: Media industry discriminates against women, says ex-Vanity Fair editor     Law firm Russell Kennedy had complied with reporting requirements to the WGEA each year, but last June decided to analyse its gender equity in pay. Its managing director, Paul Gleeson, said it was one of the easiest things to measure because its numbers and it would also assist the company in applying to become a WGEA employer of choice. We found in two or three instances in our organisation there were areas where there was a disparity in pay which couldnt be explained and it was a gender-based disparity, he said.  Gleeson said the company remedied the disparity through its annual pay reviews and monitoring, but transparency was an issue because of the confidentiality of salaries.      The company has also changed policy to presume the viability of a flexible work arrangement request, provided it still met company needs.  We simply turned it on its head to make it clear that from this point forward all roles are flexible, said Gleeson. In terms of the attitude and cultural change thats come about, I think its really quite fundamental.   Related: Three things Ive learned about the real meaning of gender equality | Kirthi Jayakumar    The proportion of companies with targets for managers on gender equality also rose to 28.4%, as did those with a policy or strategy for flexible working (to 68.3%). More than 43% of organisations also reported formal policies or strategies to support employees experiencing domestic violence  the vast majority through flexible working arrangements and access to unpaid leave.  The report said while there was a substantial change in employer focus on gender equity in 2016-17, key indicators still revealed widespread inequality.  The report also revealed improvements in the number of women appointed to managerial roles but, said Lyons, unfortunately, the number of women on boards remains static and too few organisations are reporting their gender metrics up to the board.  If we consider that governing boards are there to monitor strategy, to provide the overall governance and also to ensure the best productivity and returns to the shareholder, the fact the numbers havent improved tells me boards are either sticking their heads in the sand or ignorant of the fact that the business case of gender equality is absolutely clear, she said.  There is an abundance of evidence out there that says organisations that are gender-balanced are more productive, retain staff longer, staff are more engaged, they get better shareholder returns."
"21""Australian teenagers experiencing gender dysphoria will be able to undergo hormone treatment without requiring court approval after a landmark decision by the federal court on Thursday. Before the ruling, Australia was the only country in the world that required court involvement to allow treatment. Pressure had been mounting from advocacy groups, lawyers, transgender people and their families for the requirement to be overturned. They argued that the court process was costly, traumatic and unnecessary, given that medical experts were also involved.  The case before a federal court concerned a 16-year-old transgender man who made an application to the family court to approve his testosterone treatment. The case was referred up to the full court, which was asked reconsider its role in such cases. On Thursday afternoon a full sitting of the family court handed down its decision, determining that a court decision was not necessary to approve hormone treatment in cases where a child had given consent, their treating medical practitioners agreed that the child was competent to give that consent and when the parents of the child did not object to the treatment. Hilary Kincaid, the principal solicitor at the Inner City Legal Centre, represented the applicants in the case and said the judgment would mean transgender youth could make important decisions with their parents and doctors and without the stress of court interference. Not to mention the expense, she said. We are a free service but some private firms represent people full-fee in cases like this and I estimate this can cost between $10,000 and $15,000, not to mention the cost to families of getting expert medical reports for evidence. The director of legal advocacy at the Human Rights Law Centre, Anna Brown, described the decision as a stunning victory for young transgender people. This will make a profound difference to the lives of many young trans people who will now be relieved of the burden of a costly and unnecessary court process in order to access hormone treatment that supports them to be who they are, she said.  Doctors and parents are able make decisions about every other kind of medical treatment for young people  including ethically complex decisions that weigh up risks and the consequences of not undergoing treatment  and gender dysphoria should be no different. The decision departs from the last judgment of the full court in case known as Re Jamie, in which trans teenager and now the young Victorian Australian of the year Georgie Stone unsuccessfully challenged the courts role. This bizarre legal anomaly was born of outdated attitudes to trans young people and a lack of understanding of just how far medical science and treatment of gender dysphoria has come in recent years, Brown said.  The not-for-profit legal information service Justice Connect established the Stage 2 Access project to help young trans people and their families to navigate the court process to access hormone treatment. A lawyer with the project, Sally Priestley, said the court had recognised on Thursday that the process was unfair. Importantly, also, for the young people themselves, going to court can be hugely taxing, Priestley said. The court environment is bad enough for people who arent forced to seek permission to have their body align with their identity. This decision is a huge victory for so many young people and their families. The latest research shows that there are probably around 45,000 trans and gender-diverse young people in Australia, and this will save them enormous amounts of money, time and heartache."
"22""In the dim classroom, the low lights form a halo around Achyuta Dyansamantra as he strides back and forth before a whiteboard, intoning into the microphone like a preacher. If you stare at a women for more than 14 seconds, that can land you in jail, he tells the audience. Singing to women in public or passing lewd remarks is also banned, he says. Whether you agree with it or not, the law is the law. About 100 faces stare back, many scribbling notes, some toying with their phones. These men in grey-blue safari suits are some of more than 100,000 commercial drivers who operate taxis and rickshaws in the teeming Indian capital, Delhi. Since a gang rape and murder five years ago incensed the nation, such gender sensitisation classes have become mandatory to renew commercial driving licences in the city. As the anniversary of the death of physiotherapy student Jyoti Singh approaches, advocates for Indian women say these classes are helping to change a patriarchal culture, one that has proved more stubborn to reform than the countrys laws against sexual harassment and assault. One thickly-bearded and turbaned driver has been raising his hand patiently during the class. Generally, all the rape happens in India and not in foreign countries, he says when finally called on. Why is that so? The man answers himself before Dyansamantra can speak. In this country, if you want to have sex, you cannot do so  thats why there is rape, he says. Dyansamantra frowns. We will discuss this later on, he says. (Delhi does have a red-light district, he adds.) The citys army of rickshaw and taxi drivers pose no particular threat to women. As in other cities, sexual violence in the capital is most frequently committed by men known to their victims. If drivers were a problem, the Delhi transport system would have come to a stop, says Rutika Sharma, a social worker who helps run the schemes, developed by the Delhi-based Manas Foundation, a mental health group. But as growing numbers of women venture out to work and simply live their lives, they are coming into more frequent contact with commercial drivers  some from backgrounds where the idea of an independent women is still relatively new. We are trying to explain things in 40 minutes or one hour, that they have been seeing for 40 years, Sharma says. Changing regressive mindsets is the aim of the class. Clothing is a major argument, Sharma says. Some drivers say fashion  what the girls are wearing  is not Indian culture. They say we are copying other countries. Inevitably, some raise this kind of clothing as a contributing factor to sexual harassment or assault. We tell them rape cases are increasing with girls aged six months or two years old, says Dyansamantra. Or we show them stories of an 82-year-old lady being raped by some man. We ask the drivers: what was she wearing? And they realise  everything is a mindset. Women drinking is also a big issue, says Sharma, especially in Hauz Khas Village, a south Delhi neighbourhood of bars and restaurants. If a girl goes to Hauz Khas, she is a not a good girl. Its a bad place, where a girl cannot go. That is their mindset, she says.    We tell them 70% of their passengers are women. So if we wont come out, how will the drivers earn?  Rutika Sharma, social worker     Drivers frequently push back. They say: you are modern children of Delhi universities, so you can talk like this, but we cant. We are deep-rooted Indians, she says. But we tell them everything is changing. Now your taxi needs an AC. You have good phones. You are sending your own daughters to school, which you didnt do before. You are giving your children this change, so why dont you accept it? Where moral persuasion fails, an appeal to the pocket can be effective. We tell them 70% of their passengers are women. We run their business, Sharma says. So if we wont come out, how will the drivers earn? At the end of each class, drivers receive a sticker for their vehicle. Along with my taxi, I also drive a campaign to end violence against women, one declares. Another says: women respect and safety is my honour and duty. Outside the training centre, Subhash Chander is reclined in the backseat of his rickshaw, smoking a cigarette. Of course you have to respect women, he says. But Im an old man. Why do I need to attend such a class? Much has changed in the four decades he has driven rickshaws in Delhi. When I started, there were few women passengers, he says. Now every office has women, and most of them take autos. It is not a development he welcomes. Generally, 99% of women behave wrongly, he says. They are having mobiles and all these things. They dont know how to talk to elders. Another driver, Kanak Mandol, arrived in Delhi a year ago from a village in Bihar state. What they are teaching is right, he says of the classes. But the passengers are wrong. The day before, a young couple he was driving pulled the leather curtain of his rickshaw down and began to kiss in the backseat. The girls and boys we pick up do mischief, Mandol, 24, says. If they did that in my village theyd break their legs. Mohammad Sajjid is more sanguine about how women in Delhi compare with those in his village in western Uttar Pradesh state. Here women are educated, they take up the whole rickshaw, he says. They pay independently. That is good for business. Without women, how will we make money? I find [the classes] very good. I am involved in religion, so I agree with what they say. A report from Human Rights Watch this month found Indian laws for protecting women had significantly improved in the last five years. Degrading two-finger tests  in which doctors insert their hands into women vaginas to determine a womens virginity  were outlawed in 2013. Offences such as stalking, voyeurism and sexual harassment are now included in the Indian penal code. What holds back progress is attitudes: too often, especially outside big cities, the implementation of the new laws is stymied by judges, police and village leaders, the report said. Changing behaviour is harder than amending the law, says Swati Maliwal, the Delhi commissioner for women. But it is possible, she says. It is about systems and deterrence and changing mindsets. As an example, she points to another form of transport, the Delhi metro, a strikingly clean and efficient system in a city renowned for dirt and chaos. People come from all over to use [the metro], she says. Villagers, city dwellers, and people of all classes. But they behave themselves and keep it clean and follow the rules. Dyansamantra and his colleagues at the Manas Foundation know the daily struggle involving in changing mindsets. But he insists they are making progress. Yesterday one driver told me that girls shouldnt laugh loudly in India. They shouldnt show their teeth, he says. And the other drivers shouted at him. What kind of nonsense are you telling people? they said. When I talked to him afterwards, he said, I think I was wrong, please forgive me. The drivers are starting to listen. Theyre hearing and countering each other. Thats the best thing. The instructors are learning too. Sharma smiles as she recalls the advice an older driver gave her in a recent class. Daughter, you are trying to light small lamps, he said. In this class of 100 people, some are sleeping, some are saying India is modernising and forgetting its culture and these girls are wild. But if in this class of 100 people, 15 or 20 will try to understand what youre talking about, then 15 or 20 lamps will light. If you reach 20 people in a class of 100, there will be change."
"23""For the past 500 years, beautiful sacred music has echoed up towards Michelangelos sublime ceiling frescoes in the Sistine Chapel, performed exclusively by male choirs. Until now. In a development that will delight both music lovers and reform-minded Catholics, one of the churchs gender taboos has finally been broken. Cecilia Bartoli, one of Italys most celebrated classical singers, has become the first women to perform inside the chapel with the all-male Sistine Chapel Choir, as part of a unique musical project which draws on ancient, neglected musical archives of the Catholic church. On Friday night the mezzo-soprano joined the 20 men and 30 boys who make up the choir, among the oldest choral groups in the world, to sing Beata Viscera, by the Renaissance composer Protin. A few days before, the five-time Grammy award-winner told the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera that she was in seventh heaven about the prospect of performing in the chapel, and [possibly] before Pope Francis. Its a huge privilege, she added. Bartolis dream of meeting Pope Francis was not fulfilled  he was unable to attend the performance  but the singer made a huge impact on the choir. She was incredible, Mark Spyropoulos, the first British full-time member of the choir, told the Observer after the show. Shes well known for her interpretations of early music and it was great for us to be recording with someone like that. Women sing with a different timbre to men, so to hear that sound, the wonderful richness that women sing with on that piece, is very unusual in the Sistine Chapel  because, of course, its an all-male choir. Spyropoulos, a former flower presenter at the Royal Opera House in Londons Covent Garden, was particularly enamoured by her presence, especially having presented flowers to her at the end of shows she performed there. And now to have sung with her  it was amazing.   s frescoes soared over the historic event.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"676\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Michelangelos frescoes soared over the historic event. Photograph: Franco Origlia/Getty Images    Bartolis voice also features on the pontifical choirs 16-track Christmas CD, Veni Domine: Advent and Christmas at the Sistine Chapel, which was released in Italy in October and worldwide this month. The recording, made up of a repertoire of scores from manuscripts by the greatest composers of the Renaissance era, which are contained within the vast archive of the Vatican library, was produced in the chapel in part because of its unique acoustics, but also because three of the compositions had originally been produced to be sung there for papal celebrations and had never been performed in modern times. This new production, focusing on the liturgical time of Christmas, is based on the unique characteristic of translating into sound the manuscripts present in the Sistine Chapel archive, a truly precious treasure chest, said Archbishop Georg Gnswein, prefect of the papal household, during a press conference at the Vatican on the day the album was&#xa0;released. It is the third album produced in partnership with Universal Music Italia and the German classical music label Deutsche Grammophon, with proceeds from sales going to the papal&#xa0;charities. Its ancient music, with its simplicity, Bartoli told Corriere. And to sing that music in the place it was conceived was fascinating. She described the acoustics of the chapel as generous, and ideal for this type of repertoire; the voice travels naturally. Federico Capitoni, a journalist and music critic for the daily newspaper La Repubblica, said that the inclusion of a women in the choir was a significant gesture of openness by the Vatican. Once the decision had been taken, the 51-year-old Bartoli was an obvious choice. Her voice is especially predisposed to the music from that period, as well as her character  the lightness and subtlety, he told the Observer. And she is probably the most famous Italian mezzo-soprano; its inevitable they chose her. The choice marked a monumental shift in a choir which formed in the 15th century and enjoyed a golden period during the Renaissance before suffering a decline in the second half of the 20th century, when it earned the unfortunate nickname of the Sistine screamers. More recently, under the leadership of Monsignor Massimo Palombella, a Salesian priest appointed choirmaster by Pope Benedict in 2010, the group has been enjoying a revival, even undertaking its first tour of the US in 30 years in September. Nowadays, men no longer have to be ordained, unmarried or Italian to join the choir. So it was probably only a matter of time before a women was allowed in, although its unlikely to be a regular occurrence. The problem is, our repertoire is written for men, with the bulk of it being written in the pre-15th century and 16th century, said Spyropoulos, who joined the choir in 2015. As a choir in the Sistine we have to sing with a very aesthetic precedence, so its difficult to include women in this particular choir. Personally Im a great advocate of women singing choral music  its fantastic. But this is really a question of the right timbre for this kind of music. In her interview with Corriere, Bartoli, who became artistic director of the Salzburg Whitsun Festival in 2012, spoke about the lack of women in orchestras. There is still so much to do [in that respect], she said. Capitoni disputes this observation: Her experience of things is no doubt different, but its a question of changing times. A few generations ago, there were few women but today I come across many who are studying music, singing and performing."
"24""The drawn-out, opaque process of choosing the next bishop of London will come to a head next week when the body that manages the appointment holds final interviews. But as inscrutable as the process is, one thing seems certain: the next number three in the Church of England is highly unlikely to be a women. The new, 133rd, bishop of London  a job that includes a seat in the House of Lords and membership of the privy council  is expected to be announced early next year, almost 12 months after the most recent incumbent, Richard Chartres, retired. When Chartres stepped down, there were reports that the vicars daughter Theresa May, who is sent the chosen name by the Crown Nominations Commission (CNC), hoped the next bishop of London would be a women. The names of senior female figures in the church  the bishops Rachel Treweek, Christine Hardman and Jo Bailey Wells; the dean of York Minster, Vivienne Faull; the chaplain to the House of Commons speaker, Rose Hudson-Wilkins  were bandied about. But almost no one realistically expects a women to be appointed given the strong opposition in some London parishes to female vicars, let alone to a women occupying such a powerful position. The best progressives can hope for, they say, is the appointment of a man who is prepared to ordain women as priests  a radical break from Chartres, who declined to ordain clergy of either gender in order not to antagonise traditionalists. Twenty-five years after the C of E general synod voted by the tiniest of margins to allow female clergy, the church recently trumpeted new data showing the number of women entering training to become priests in 2017 was the highest for a decade. This years intake saw a 50-50 gender split, and a 19% increase in the number of female trainee priests compared to the year before. But the headline statistics mask a complicated and less encouraging picture. There are proportionately far fewer younger women being ordained; only 28% of stipendiary posts go to women and women are much more likely to end up looking after small rural parishes than big urban churches. Its taken a long time to get here, said Treweek, bishop of Gloucester and the first female bishop to sit in the House of Lords. But, she added, the number of young women [entering the priesthood] is still low, and the number of women in senior positions is still low. We dont have a very high number of women leading big churches. There are still assumptions; the norm is still male. Women still feel they have to prove themselves and justify themselves. In London, only 13% of paid posts are held by women. Other dioceses where the proportion is low include Chichester (12%), Blackburn (15%) and Winchester (16%), according to data from Women and the Church (Watch). In London, there are significant areas with people who dont consider women to be proper priests, said Rosalind Rutherford of Watch. She pointed to some evangelical churches which adhere to the theology of male headship, with women confined to supporting roles. There are very small numbers of women running important churches in London. There are lots of women out there who are perfectly capable of doing such jobs  including that of bishop of London  but there is still the unspoken assumption that women are there as mens helpmeets, she said. The fact that the C of E thinks its OK to live with inequality enshrined in its law doesnt help the situation. Rutherford was referring to the C of Es five guiding principles, which commit the church to mutual flourishing for all its traditions. In practice, they protect those who cannot accept women as priests  institutionalised discrimination, according to critics. The principles attracted renewed attention earlier this year after Philip North, bishop of Burnley and an opponent of female priests, was promoted to the job of bishop of Sheffield. The move immediately triggered protests from those who said his appointment was unacceptable in a diocese where a third of clergy were women. Six weeks later, in a blow to the church establishment, North renounced the post, saying it was clear my leadership would not be acceptable to many. The church says to women: Ooh yes, lovely, we want you to come and work for us  but you also need to know that its perfectly all right for some of your colleagues to say that simply because you were born in a womens body, you cant do certain things. I find that very difficult, said the Rev Canon Emma Percy, chaplain of Trinity College, Oxford. The apparent favourite to emerge from next weeks CNC process is Stephen Cottrell, currently bishop of Chelmsford, a down-to-earth, straight-talking Essex boy. He has advocated more diversity in the C of E and was denounced as unbiblical by two churches in his diocese earlier this year after he backed prayers of thanksgiving for same-sex relationships. In the run-up to the 2014 synod vote, he argued for female bishops. Short of a female (or gay) bishop of London, for those yearning for equality within the church he may be the next best thing."
"25""The gender pay gap for women in their 20s is growing after years of decline, with some young women being paid less than men from the start of their careers, figures have revealed.  The figures were released on Friday, named as Equal Pay Day and the day of the year when women in effect begin to work for free due to the pay gap. Gender rights campaigners said the data highlighted a national scandal created by the same power imbalance that allowed sexual harassment and discrimination in the workplace. They warned that the UK was going backwards in addressing the issue, with the gulf widening for young women.   Related: Women will wait 217 years for pay gap to close, WEF says    Sam Smethers, chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said: The pay gap is widest for older women as it grows over our working lives but we are now seeing a widening of the pay gap for younger women too, which suggests we are going backwards and that is extremely worrying. Sophie Walker, leader of the women Equality party, stressed that the gender pay gap had to be viewed as part of the same power imbalance that had lead to a series of sexual harassment scandals in politics, the media and entertainment industry.  Unequal pay is one of the main barriers to equality and is a key factor in sexual harassment and violence against women, she said. The pay gap is another national scandal that we dont understand, and it has this same national narrative around it that women are somehow choosing this treatment  this idea that inequality is some sort of lifestyle choice.   The gender pay gap is widest in London and narrowest in Wales   The gender pay gap for women in their 20s has been widening recently, and is now five times greater than it was six years ago, although older women still face greater pay discrimination than workers at the start of their career.  Progress has stalled on closing the gender pay gap, which now stands at 14.1% according to the Office for National Statistics, with no movement on the figure in the last three years. At the current rate of change it will take 100 years to close the male-female gap in pay.  According to the ONS, older women face the greatest discrimination, with women in their 50s paid on average 18.6% less than their male colleagues. While the gap among younger women had almost been eliminated, in the last six years there was a notable increase, from 1.1% in 2011 to 5.5% this year.     The gender pay gap in Britain stands at 14.1%, according to ONS figures. Photograph: Dinendra Haria/Rex    The gap is highest in London (20.7%), followed by the south-east at 16.3%. It is lowest in Wales, at 8.3%, and the north-east, at 10.2%. The gap is higher in the private sector, at 17.1%. But it has fallen by 4.3% points since 2011, while in the public sector it has plateaued at just above 14%.  Fawcett Society research published this year found that the mean aggregate pay gap for Pakistani and Bangladeshi women was 26% and for black African women it was 24%. Using the hashtag #paygappledge, the Fawcett Society is encouraging workers across the UK to take action to tackle the gap by starting a conversation at work and speaking to their employers, while companies and the government are being urged to make tangible, effective changes.  The women Equality party is coordinating thousands of women to send an out-of-office message today in protest about in effect not being paid for the remainder of the year.    Related: Finding ways to jump the gender pay divide | Letters    Imagine the chaos if all of those women in all those areas of work simply walked away from their jobs today, said Walker. Shops shut, hospitals in crisis, businesses forced to close, dads scrambling to find childcare cover. Its time for fair pay.  The government has set a deadline for businesses with more than 250 staff to report their gender pay gap (which will be available on the government website) by 31 March 2018. Some companies have already started reporting, including the BBC, which was fiercely criticised after several high-profile employees were found to have salaries significantly lower than their male counterparts.  Maria Miller, the MP for Basingstoke and chair of the women and equalities select committee, said: We continue to hear warm words from the government on eliminating the gender pay gap but clearly progress remains disappointing. Businesses must also take responsibility.  We continue to push for urgent action and reiterate that flexible working, sharing unpaid caring responsibilities, and supporting women returning to work after having children, are all key to tackling the problem.   Related: You cant justify the gender pay gap. But the Alan Partridge types will try | Peter Bradshaw    Walker said that a main reason for the pay gap was that the UK had the most expensive childcare in the world. It takes away the choice about whether and how much women want to work. And when women take up lower-paid part-time roles and men dominate more senior jobs, there is a power imbalance, and that is where harassment thrives because women are being forced into a position of dependency. Carole Easton, chief executive of the Young women Trust, said that even if women did have children or were at the beginning of their career, discrimination was there; it started from the moment women start work. The trusts research revealed that young female apprentices earned 8% less than their male peers, leaving them more than 1,000 a year worse off.   The gender pay gap is markedly wider for the over 40s   At this rate, todays young women will be retired before equal pay becomes a reality, Easton said. Often this is because the sectors women tend to work in  such as administration, health and social care and retail  are not valued and paid as much as they should be. Government data shows that male graduates of almost all degree subjects are out-earning women within just a few years of completing their degrees. Anne Milton, minister for women and for skills and apprenticeships, , said that despite the passing of the Equal Pay Act nearly 50 years ago too many women were still held back in their careers.  The pay gap wont close on its own, we all need to take action to make sure we address this, she said. That is why we have introduced a legal requirement for all large employers to publish their gender pay and bonus data by April 2018. Im pleased that some of our top companies are leading the way and have already reported. By shining a light on where there are gaps they can take action to address it. The way jobs are set up has held me back Laura Davies enjoyed her job in retail. She wanted to do more training, push herself further and earn more money, but when she became pregnant aged 20 she found that many of the avenues were closed off.  When my employers found out I was pregnant they made things very hostile, they didnt want me to stay, she says. So I had no choice but to leave. Until recently, Davies, now 27, was working part-time, but found that her childcare responsibilities meant she could not go on to a higher level of pay. I left at the end of July in my last job, they refused flexible working and they turned me down for promotion because they thought I was not committed, which wasnt true. Now Im self employed because I think its the only way Im going to get ahead. She, and friends, she said, who were also young mothers, felt the odds were stacked against them.  Most people think the wage gap is comparing the same wage in the same job, but young mums work lower paid jobs, which dont have the potential for progression, arent flexible enough [for trying] new things or training courses, she says.  The options open to young women, with or without children, in lower-paid work, are a frustration, she says, adding that even at apprenticeship level jobs dominated by women are paid and valued less.  There is a mentality that young mums arent hard workers, but my friends are some of the hardest working I know, she adds. Especially being young you have to work so much harder to prove that you can do it. Davies now works from home as an online marketer, working hours that fit around looking after her son. But she feels as if several employers have failed to see, and help her realise, her potential.  I feel the way jobs are set up has held me back. Billions of hours are being wasted because mums arent being used to their potential. Why cant employers find a flexible way of working? Id have loved the potential to progress in my retail job, but because I worked part-time and I was a new mum they didnt feel I was the fit  I had to do it myself and push myself up the ladder."
"26""My mother, Judy El-Bushra, who has died aged 73, was a bright star in the world of feminism, action research and development in east and central Africa and the Horn of Africa. Her long and varied work in gender and conflict studies has helped underpin peacebuilding in those regions. She worked on issues including community-based HIV/Aids response, micro-finance and pastoralism. Her approach was to challenge assumptions such as women are peace-loving and men are violent, and recognise that women and men, girls and boys live with gender identities which are relational, and which are all subject to, and agents of, power relations. She firmly believed that violent conflict is anchored in an ordered, gendered structure, and that gender analysis expands our understanding of women and men, leading to improved conditions for all. Judy was the eldest of four children of Katharine (nee Harris), a teacher, and the ceramicist David Ballantyne, who was a committed pacifist and conscientious objector during the second world war. As a teenager in rural Hampshire, Judy was chair of her youth CND unit and she went to study at Soas in London, just as the prosperity and optimism of the 60s was getting into full swing. Her course in African studies took her in 1964 to Nigeria, to the courts of the emirs of Katsina and Kazaure and to Kano City. There she and her colleagues carried out the first survey of people with leprosy, when Kano was still a medieval, mud-walled citadel. While at Soas she had met a Sudanese student, Ahmed El-Bushra, who was studying for a masters in Egyptology at University College London. At the age of 20, she travelled alone across West Africa to Sudan, to marry him. Judy held positions as gender adviser with international development agencies including Acord (1982-2002), Oxfam (1988-92), Comic Relief (1990-98), DfID (2002-11), Unesco/Unicef (2006-11), the LSE (2011-13) and International Alert (2006-11). She was the author and editor of numerous articles and books, including, with a co-editor Judith Gardner, Somalia: The Untold Story (2004). Her paper Why Does Armed Conflict Recur and What Has Gender Got to Do With It? was recently published by the LSE. She was planning to return for a second year as visiting professor to the Institut dEtudes Politiques de Paris. Judy is survived by Ahmed, their children, Sarrah, Moy, Suhayla and me, and grandchildren, Jamal, Alya, Malik, Zaki and Molly."
"27""When Lin Yu-han has a successful date, she uses Twitter to talk about it. Other times she simply calls for her followers to shed South Koreas conservative social mores and have a bit more fun. Why do you need to be engaged or feel some deep responsibility to have sex? she wrote. If theyre hotties with bodies just hop on. Who cares about goddamn attachment, Lin wrote in another post, adding an expletive-filled sentence that expressed her hatred of men who underperform in bed. From now on, Ill try them out and if the sex is bad, Im never gonna meet them again. Lin is part of a grassroots sexual revolution sweeping South Korea, where a deeply conservative society is beginning to loosen up when it comes to sex, and women are challenging centuries of strict gender roles in relationships. Long held taboos around sex are rapidly melting away, giving rise to more casual relationships and less focus on marriage, while doctors have seen a sharp increase in the number of patients asking for contraceptives. A lot of people still think a women talking about sex in public is bad, while men talk about sex all the time, Lin said in an interview in Seouls upmarket Gangnam neighbourhood. I just want to break that. The 34-year-old has been chronicling her relationships and thoughts on sex for more than two years, originally with the aim of encouraging other young women to be more independent. She believes that as South Koreas economic growth has plateaued, marrying young has become less important, leaving more room for casual relationships. Many in Seoul are still shy when discussing sex, and Korean uses a host of English loan words for terms including penis, adult shop and even sex itself. Despite the country having some of the fastest internet in the world, the government regularly censors online pornography, placing it on the same level as gambling and North Korean propaganda. The most conspicuous manifestation of South Koreas newfound openness is a rash of sex shops that have sprung up across Seoul, the latest fad in a country that latches on to trends with particular ferocity. Pleasure Lab, in the fashionable tree-lined Dosan neighbourhood, mainly focuses on women, and its founder, Eura Kwak, a former nurse, holds regular educational seminars.  With Kendrick Lamar on the sound system and a clean, minimalist design, the shop tries to shake the seedy image most associate with sex toys. Staff ensure every customer receives a pamphlet with a detailed drawing showing the location of the clitoris. Its difficult for women to take a leading role in South Korean society when it comes to sex, Kwak said. Men always took the lead in sex, which meant for a long time sexuality for women did not exist. Giving pleasure isnt shameful, but in Korean culture, when women talk about pleasure people will call her a whore, she added. In a sign of lingering conservative attitudes, South Koreas most popular search engine, Naver, has blocked results for searches for the stores name, forcing Kwak to place a sticker on each item explaining how to circumvent the ban. Without people like us, peoples perception of sex wouldnt have changed. Its not about the mood of society allowing us to exist; its about spearheading a movement, she said. If businesses like us didnt start, I think wed be exactly where we were five years ago. Our community was underground for so long While portrayals of relationships in mainstream media remain largely chaste, there have been a few edgier programmes. The television show Witch Hunt, which first aired in 2013, was known for its frank talk about sex and relationships, but was originally conceived as a programme to teach awkward men how to succeed in romance and all of the four hosts were male. In March a show called Cranky Men and Women began airing with the explicit purpose of talking honestly about gender stereotypes in everyday life, and has been championed by prominent feminists. In 2015 the countrys highest court ruled a 60-year-old law that banned adultery was illegal. The crime had been punishable by up to two years in prison, although jail time had become increasingly rare. The court had previously reviewed the law three times and kept it in place.     Kuciia Diamant, a prominent drag queen, poses in a cafe in Seoul. Photograph: Benjamin Haas for the Guardian    And others attribute the newfound sexual freedom to the rise of feminism in popular culture and increased visibility of sexual minorities fighting for equality. Kuciia Diamant is an office worker at an e-commerce company by day, and Seouls most famous drag queen every weekend. Our community was underground for so long, but wanted to be a bridge to wider society, Kuciia said. Starting in 2015, the Korea queer culture festival was held in the heart of Seoul in a plaza outside city hall, bringing more attention and even a vocal contingent of protesters. In South Korea, a group of scantily clad men and women partying in front of a government building is national news. Were making sex seem fun and more enjoyable, Kuciia said. Theres no event or leader. The change is coming from us, from individuals seeing and learning more about sexuality and gender issues, and expressions like drag performances are becoming more accepted. But South Koreas large and vocal Christian community is alarmed by recent trends. Pastor So Kang-suk preaches often about the pitfalls of liberal attitudes towards sex and he is a frequent fixture at anti-LGBTI demonstrations.  South Korea had been respecting its traditional values, but this such a radical change, So said. Its going in the wrong direction.     Pastor So Kang-suk, a fierce opponent of liberal sexual attitudes and LGBT rights, in Seoul. Photograph: Benjamin Haas for the Guardian    He likens the trend to the Summer of Love, when thousands of hippies espousing peace and free love descended on San Francisco in 1967.  His Sae Eden congregation, a megachurch in a Seoul suburb with 40,000 parishioners, has started hosting events aiming to teach people sex is valuable, sex is precious. People are sexual animals, but there must be ethical values in sex, he said. Even as this new openness comes at us like a flood, the youth that engages in free sex, if they look deep inside themselves they cant say what they are doing is legitimate or proper. With additional reporting by Soeun Seo and Jake Kwon."
"28""Top story: Twitter told to reveal extent of Kremlin trolling 
Hello, its Warren Murray unpacking things for you this morning.  
Russian government troll accounts posted extensively about Brexit in the lead-up to the referendum. Researchers at the University of Edinburgh found 419 accounts operating from the Russian Internet Research Agency attempted to influence UK politics. All have been suspended by Twitter in the US. 
The accounts included people purporting to be a US navy veteran, a Tennessee Republican and a Texan patriot  all tweeting in favour of Brexit. Damian Collins, chairman of the Commons committee investigating fake news, wants Twitter to release examples of UK-related postings linked to the Russian troll factory. 
On Brexit itself, Tory rebels have vowed to ignore blood-curdling threats and vote against a fixed deadline of 29 March 2019 for exiting the EU; while Theresa May has won the first five votes on an EU withdrawal bill that still has a long way to go. The Conservative MP Anna Soubry last night accused the Daily Telegraph of bullying over todays Brexit mutineers front page singling out the Tory rebels in the manner of a wanted poster. 
 
* * * 
Treachery and treason  There is turmoil in Zimbabwe where a virtual coup has taken place. Explosions and live fire have been heard in the capital, Harare, where the armed forces have rolled in and taken over a state broadcaster. We are covering the situation live. The dramatic development came after President Robert Mugabe, 93, sacked his military-backed vice-president to help set up his own wife, Grace Mugabe, as his presidential successor. The military has called all troops to barracks  while insisting the Mugabes are safe and it is only a temporary measure to target criminals around the president and secure the independence of parliament and the judiciary. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
* * * 
Path to World War III  The US military would not follow a nuclear strike order from Donald Trump that it considered illegal, senators have been told. Legislators on both the Republican and Democratic sides are worried that the US president is too volatile and unstable to command the arsenal and might order a cataclysmic attack on North Korea out of anger or frustration. Gen Robert Kehler, ex-commander of US Strategic Command, told a Senate hearing: If there is an illegal order presented to the military, the military is obligated to refuse to follow it. Ed Markey, a Democratic senator from Massachusetts who is sponsoring legislation that would limit the presidents authority to launch a first nuclear strike, said he was not convinced lawyers would be able to stand in the way of generals appointed by Trump. Thats a very thin reed on which to have the fate of the planet being dependent. 
* * * 
Lets get on with it  Australians have said yes to same-sex marriage. The result came in 61.6% for, 38.4% against, in a national postal survey. Australias conservative-led parliament still has to act on the result by changing the countrys marriage laws; a referendum or plebiscite that would have been more binding on parliament was scrapped, lacking bipartisan support. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
Malcolm Turnbull, the prime minister, implicitly warned fellow conservatives that the public are our masters and the parliament should now deliver on the result before Christmas. It could get quite messy, though. Religious conservatives have been promised exemptions  but what if you are an atheist baker who doesnt believe in same-sex marriage? Can you refuse to bake a gay wedding cake? 
* * * 
Setback for gig workers  Deliveroo has been accused of gaming the system after convincing the CAC employment tribunal that it does not owe its riders the minimum wage or holiday pay. The Independent Workers Union of Great Britain (IWGB) said: The CAC decided that because a rider can have a mate do a delivery for them, Deliveroos low-paid workers are not entitled to basic protections. Being unable to send someone else to do your work essentially gives you the status and entitlements of an employee in Britain. The union is considering whether to appeal. Deliveroo says it wants employment law changed so it can offer injury and sick pay while maintaining flexibility. 
* * * 
The Disability Diaries  The wheelchair help button is at the top of the steps and youre at the bottom. No kerb crossings on the route home. Being mistaken for drunk when youve got Parkinsons. Having help foisted on you when you dont want it. We asked seven people to keep diaries for a month to document the reality of being disabled in Britain today. Frances Ryan reflects on the issues that arose and meets some of the diarists.  
Lunchtime read: Delias restaurant nightmares 
Are Britains restaurants too poncey, too chefy these days? Cookery legend Delia Smith has set the pot boiling with her complaint. 
 
  
  
  Delia Smith poses after she was made a member of the Order of the Companions of Honour. 
  Photograph: Reuters 
  
 
If I get one more plate put in front of me with six dots of sauce on it, I will go mad, said Delia, showing a talent for the soundbite as she received a royal honour at Buckingham Palace. Food writers have responded by suggesting that Delia get out more.  
Sport 
Republic of Irelands World Cup dream has been shattered by Denmark and a Christian Eriksen hat-trick. England, however, were able to hold Brazil to a scoreless draw in their friendly, as Neymar starred. 
Englands odd couple, Jonny May and George Ford, will look to gel as England search for improved form against the Wallabies. Jelena Dokic, former world No4, has opened up to the media about her experience of child abuse at the hands of her father Damir in the hope of helping others. Finally, Roger Federer has advanced to the semis of the ATP World Tour finals after overcoming Alexander Zverev.  
Business 
Shares fell in Asia on Wednesday, tracking modest losses overnight on Wall Street, where the biggest drop in crude oil prices since October weighed on oil producers and other energy stocks. The International Energy Agency cut its forecast for crude consumption, saying recovering prices and a mild early winter were weighing on purchases. 
The pound has been trading at $1.314 and 1.114 overnight. 
The papers 
Were a nation of pill poppers, with half of pensioners taking at least five drugs a day, says the Daily Mail, which is worried about the medicalisation of the elderly. 
 
  
  
  Guardian front page, Wednesday 15 November 2017. 
  
 
Both the Guardian and the Times cover the Russian government troll factorys meddling in the Brexit referendum debate. The Telegraphs got that instantly notorious front page identifying the Tory Brexit mutineers who wont back Theresa Mays hard date for leaving the EU. The Express reckons Labour is scheming for Britain to remain a full EU member for at least two years after March 2019. 
The Mirror covers the Duchess of Cambridges uncle appearing in court for domestic violence. The FT says bankers and other professionals are being promised a special free-movement travel regime by David Davis  free business daily CityAM covers that one as well. The Scotsman reports on a shortage of teachers in key subjects.  
For more news: www.theguardian.com 
Sign up 
The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here."
"29""The leader of Icelands Left-Green movement has become the countrys new prime minister at the head of a broad three-party coalition that could restore a measure of political stability after a succession of scandals. Katrn Jakobsdttir, 41, a popular former education minister who is considered to be Icelands most trusted politician, took office on Wednesday after formally signing a new government accord with the centre-right Independence and Progressive parties. She told local media the administrations focus would be on greater investment in healthcare, education and transport infrastructure, sustaining Icelands economic recovery from the 2008 financial crash, and improving gender equality and LGBT rights.  The outgoing prime minister, Bjarni Benediktssons Independence party narrowly won the 28 October election  the countrys second snap poll in less than a year  but lost a quarter of its seats, paving the way for Jakobsdttir to form a left-led coalition. Benediktsson called the election in September after his centre-right coalition collapsed 10 months after taking office over an alleged attempt to cover up efforts by his father to help restore the honour of a convicted child sex offender. The coalition had been formed following early elections triggered by the resignation of Benediktssons predecessor Sigmundur Dav Gunnlaugsson amid public fury at revelations in the Panama Papers that his family had sheltered money offshore. The Guardian revealed last month that while an MP, Benediktsson had sold millions of krna of assets in a major Icelandic banks investment fund as the state was about to seize control of the countrys failing financial sector in the 2008 financial crisis. Following criticism by some Left-Green voters of the partys decision to team up with the Independence party, two of its MPs withheld support for the new coalition, giving it a slim majority of 33 in the 63-member Alingi. Benediktsson, a member of one of Icelands wealthiest and most influential families, has denied any wrongdoing and is not suspected of breaking any law. He is set to be finance and economic affairs minister in the new government.  Amid widespread dissatisfaction with the cronyism and corruption many see as endemic in the countrys political and business classes, polls have shown almost half of Icelands voters wanted Jakobsdttir to become their next prime minister. Jakobsdttir, who has three children and an MA in Icelandic literature (her dissertation was on the bestselling Nordic noir writer Arnaldur Indriason), became deputy chair of the Left-Greens in 2003 and was education minister from 2009 to 2013."
"30""The French president, Emmanuel Macron, is to launch a cultural war against sexism and sexual violence with a five-year emergency plan including educating secondary school children about pornography and simplifying the system for rape and assault victims to go to the police. When Macron won the presidential election in May, his centrist movement promised not only to overhaul the existing political party system, but to rethink sexual politics and gender equality  a campaign issue that Elyse officials said pre-dated the scandal surrounding abuse allegations against the Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein and others.  French feminist groups, however, have warned that Macrons plans  to be set out in a speech on Saturday, the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women  must include a boost in state grants to charities working with victims of domestic violence and sexual abuse, and better training for police on sexual harassment issues.  Feminists have called on the president to shut down a current Cinmathque Franaise retrospective featuring the films of the director Roman Polanski who is facing new rape allegations.  Alongside the speech, the government will release a hard-hitting TV and social media campaign against sexism and sexual violence, aimed at changing attitudes and behaviour in the same way as previous campaigns against issues such as drink-driving. The campaign will stress that witnesses must step forward and speak out. From next September, children beginning secondary school will be taught about the reality and dangers of pornography, teachers will be trained better to deal with issues raised by pornography, and parents will be advised how to tackle the problems it causes. The announcement comes in the same week as the citizens rights ombudsman attacked the government for failing to deliver adequate sex education in schools.  Planned changes to the police system include allowing victims of rape and sexual assault to make their initial complaints online, before going to a police station to bring criminal charges. Victims of sexual attacks will be able to go to hospital where medical staff can gather and store physical evidence before the victim has decided whether or not to inform police. A bill on sexual harassment and violence will be debated in parliament next year to decide on the introduction of a new offence of street harassment. Child victims of rape and sexual abuse will gain a longer time period to bring criminal charges as adults; and a new legal age will be set below which a child cannot be considered to have consented to sex  likely to be somewhere between 13 and 15. An Elyse official said: This is about stronger punishment for offences, but its also about tackling the root causes of the problem in society, the domination of women by men. Stereotypes need to be deconstructed, there needs to be a cultural battle. The official said Macrons interest in equality issues dated back to his time as an investment banker sitting around boardroom tables with hardly any women, and noticing that if a women spoke, the men looked at their phones.  France has previously seen rises in public awareness and the reporting of sexual attacks following key events, such as the arrest of the would-be presidential candidate Dominique Strauss Kahn in 2011 on charges of attempted rape, but the momentum has typically dropped off. Reports of rape, sexual assault and harassment have risen by almost a third in France since the Weinstein scandal."
"31""My friend Mehmet Aksoy, who has died aged 32, was a film-maker, journalist and prominent figure in the Kurdish community in the UK. He was killed in an Isis ambush while documenting the fight between Kurdish forces and Isis in Raqqa in northern Syria. I met Mehmet in 2015 after he had given a rousing speech about an unbelievable place in northern Syria called Rojava (now known as the Democratic Federation of Northern Syria), where a self-governing, Kurdish-led democracy based on the principles of gender, race and class equality had been set up in 2012 with a special focus on women liberation. Such were Mehmets persuasive powers that I travelled to Rojava to have a look for myself. Everything he had said was true. Over the next two years I was also to discover his vast range of achievements in such a short life. Mehmet was born in Istanbul, Turkey, the oldest child of Zeynep (nee Konca) and Kalender Aksoy. When he was four his family moved to London, where his parents now run an off-licence. Educated at Leyton college and then Barnet college, he started going to the Kurdish Community Centre in central London as a teenager and there became increasingly aware of the Kurdish freedom struggle. Important milestones in his political development were the writings of the Black Panther activist George Jackson and ideas on democratic federalism put forward by Abdullah calan, the Kurdish leader now imprisoned in Turkey. After gaining a first class degree in film studies from Queen Mary University of London in 2007, Mehmet worked as editor of the Kurdish.com website, but was also founding editor of an internet-based news portal called The Region and of the website Kurdishquestion.com, the place for information, news and analysis on all things Kurdish. In tandem with his journalistic efforts he maintained his interest in film and in 2014 completed an MA in film-making at Goldsmiths, University of London: his 2014 film, Panfilo, an apocalyptic fairytale about three generations of men coming to terms with loss and death in rural Italy, won prizes at the Italian Short Film festival and the UK Student Film Awards. He was also the programme director of the annual London Kurdish film festival, and at other times could be seen wielding a megaphone or a placard in support of Kurdish self-government. In his search for answers to the Kurdish question, he tragically paid with his life. Mehmet is survived by his parents, his sister, Gonca, and his brother, Ali."
"32""Reports of rape, sexual assault and harassment have leapt by almost a third in France following the international scandal surrounding the allegations against Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein. The rise, described as exceptional is believed to have been prompted by victims feeling empowered to come forward after the #MeToo and #BalanceTonPorc (squeal on the pig) campaigns on social media. The sharp increase in reports in October, up from 1,213 in the same period last year to 1,577 (30%), was revealed by an official source to Agence France-Presse. Asked about the increase, Frances justice minister said the countrys legal system was equipped to deal with the extra workload but said she was examining the possibility of letting victims register reports of attacks online. The victim is at home; she might be able to lodge a pre-complaint online without going to the police station  that will then be followed up, Nicole Belloubet told French radio. Police in London, Los Angeles and New York have launched investigations into the alleged behaviour by Weinstein, who has been accused of sexual assault and harassment by more than 90 women. Weinstein unequivocally denies all claims of non-consensual sex, a spokesperson said. Last week, Richard Lizurey, the director general of the gendarmerie national, wrote to officers and prefects, calling for a general mobilisation to prevent violence against women and to support victims. Im counting on each of you to do your utmost to combat violence against women with determination and efficiency, Lizurey wrote. He said gendarmes  part of the military  should be aware of even the slightest evidence of violence, which, he added, should systematically result in a prosecution and pay particular attention in rooting out the growing problem of cyber violence  [and] where victims express their distress on the internet. The report came as the French parliament prepares urgent legislation to set a legal age below which a child cannot be considered to have consented to sex, which a minister has suggested could be as young as 13 years.   Demand for a new law, expected to be presented to the Assemble nationale early next year, has been sparked by two shocking recent cases in which adult males have been cleared of raping pre-adolescent girls.  Last week, a man was acquitted of rape after a court found no evidence he had forced an 11-year-old girl to have sex. The man, aged 22 at the time, accused the girl, who later became pregnant, of saying she was 14, nearly 15. The age of consent in France is 15.  In a similar case in September a 28-year-old man charged with a lesser offence of sexual assault after investigators said they could not make a rape charge stick because his 11-year-old victim had reportedly not resisted, and as such she was presumed to have consented to sex. Under French law, for the rape of a child to be considered a crime it has to be proven there was constraint threats, violence or surprise. Victims organisations point out a child should not be presumed to have consented in any situation and is often panic stricken, terrified and unable to react. The family of one of the 11-year-old girls said she had been paralysed by fear and unable to defend herself, which is why she had not fought back. In the UK absence of consent is irrefutable in all sex acts involving children under the age of 16. Similar legislation exists in other European countries including Germany and Spain. The countrys supreme council has suggested 13 years as an age under which consent cannot be presumed in any instance. Parliamentarians prefer 15 years. We have to look at the median age of emotional maturity in Europe. Its somewhere between 13 and 15, Marlne Schiappa, the gender equality minister, told French television. Belloubet, told RTL radio, that 13 years can be envisaged.  We have to allow the judge to take individual situations into account, she added. Belloubet is also looking at extending the time limit for child rape cases to be prosecuted from 20 to 30 years.  The feminist group Les effront-e-s has demanded a minimum age of 15 and called for protests outside the justice ministry on Tuesday evening.  The French president, Emmanuel Macron, is expected to address sexual violence on 25 November, International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women."
"33""Activists and opposition politicians in Turkey have rounded on a law that allows Muslim clerics to conduct civil marriages, describing it as a blow to women rights and secularism and part of an ongoing effort to impose religious values on a polarised society. The law allowing mufti marriages was passed by parliament and Turkeys president, Recep Tayyip Erdoan, then published in the countrys official gazette on Friday, despite protests by civil society activists and opposition lawmakers. Last month, Erdoan declared the bill would be passed whether you like it or not. women rights are going to decline, said Nazan Morolu, an expert on gender law and a lecturer at Yeditepe University. Everything that has been pushed on to women in this land has been done in the name of religion. Muftis are clerics empowered with issuing religious opinions on matters of day-to-day life. Previously, only state officers in branches of the family affairs directorate were able to conduct marriages.  A requirement has also been added that prohibits individuals who carried out immoral acts before marriage from becoming Turkish citizens.  Many people in Turkey, a Muslim-majority country, conduct religious ceremonies in addition to civil marriages, as do Syrian refugees who tie the knot in the country, and see it as a religious obligation. Other Middle Eastern countries do not allow civil marriages because of religious restrictions on Muslim women marrying non-Muslim men, but often recognise marriages performed abroad. Many couples in the region often travel to Cyprus or Turkey to conduct such marriages.  Supporters of the law point out that it does not change the requirements for a legal civil marriage. They say it does not create a loophole that allows child marriages or polygamy, and simply makes it more convenient for citizens who are religiously observant. Opponents contend that the law is an unnecessary distraction in a country still reeling from the aftermath of a coup attempt last year and enduring an ongoing crackdown on dissidents under a 16-month long state of emergency. They say it is part of a broader campaign by the government to impose conservative Islamic values on a divided society. Critics point to other recent changes that they say are indicative of an attempt to establish the dominance of Sunni Islam in a republic created on secular principles. They cite changes to the school curriculum that have ended the practice of teaching evolution in high school and introduced a state-sponsored explanation of the concept of jihad.  They also fear the government is turning a blind eye to other dangerous trends that are harmful to women rights, such as child marriage. The Turkish legal system sets the minimum marriage age at 17, with some exceptions for girls aged 16, with an estimated 232,000 such marriages conducted in the past four years. women rights campaigners estimate that a third of all marriages in Turkey include girls under the age of 18.  From the way this draft law was prepared without the participation of sides who will be affected, such as muftis or women groups, it is a sign of an enforcement of an idea, said Selina Doan, an opposition MP in Istanbul, who pointed out that women campaigning against the law in front of parliament were pepper sprayed. One man [Erdoan] has the power and a change to a political Islamist regime is planned.  Efforts to change long-established family legal principles in Turkey have emerged as a lightning rod in the battle between Islamists and secularists. A parliamentary commission established in 2016 by the ruling Justice and Development (AK) party to study the causes for high divorce rates introduced a series of recommendations last year that were seen as a backward step on women equality and an attempt to impose conservative family values.  Among the recommendations was a widely condemned proposal that would have granted amnesty to some men convicted of child sex assault if they marry their victims. The recommendation was tabled as a bill late last year then withdrawn after widespread protests.  Other proposals included introducing mediation by religious scholars in divorce cases and changes to the penal code that would decriminalise the practice of couples living in a religious marriage without a civil one registered with the state.  This is another trick by Erdoan to polarise society and consolidate his 50% base and nothing else, said Engin Altay, a politician with the largest opposition party. While Turkey is burning with mountains of problems they are bringing this up just to separate his base [from his opponents] with unfounded discussion."
"34""In 1955, when she was 12 years old, Billie Jean King says she had an epiphany. I was daydreaming about my little tiny universe of tennis, and I thought to myself: Everybodys wearing white shoes, white socks, white clothes, playing with white balls, everybody who plays is white. Where is everybody else? she recalls. That was the moment I decided to fight for equality and freedom and equal rights and opportunities for everyone. Everyone. Not just girls. Everyone. Now, 62 years later, the most sensational moment of her long, boundary-smashing tennis career has been turned into a film. Directed by Little Miss Sunshines Jonathan Dayton and Valerie Faris, Battle of the Sexes tells of the run-up to that infamous high-stakes 1973 match between King (Emma Stone) and the showboating, self-confessed male chauvinist pig Bobby Riggs (Steve Carell), in front of 30,000 live spectators and a colossal Superbowl-sized TV audience. But those expecting a straightforward sports movie may be surprised by its intimacy, as it draws a parallel between the weight of having to prove the worth of all female athletes in that one match, and the distress of hiding a secret affair with her female hairdresser from both her husband Larry and the world. When meeting King, it is obvious why she has been at the vanguard of so much change, having dedicated much of her life to the fight for equality. When the mens tour refused to address women concerns over pay disparity, King broke away to set up a women tour, with each of the Original Nine players signing a symbolic $1 contract (it is a barnstorming moment in the film, although the timeline has been loosened somewhat to fit dramatic demands). Shortly afterwards, she founded the women Tennis Association. But when President Obama awarded her the Medal of Freedom in 2009, he praised all the off-the-court stuff  what she did to broaden the reach of the game, to change how women athletes and women everywhere view themselves, and to give everyone, regardless of gender or sexual orientation  including my two daughters  a chance to compete both on the court and in life.     King with 55-year-old Bobby Riggs ahead of the match. Photograph: Bettmann Archive    In person, she is a brilliant and invigorating livewire, hands knitted together, leaning in to answer questions long before they are finished. She practically sparks with enthusiasm. She has a boundless curiousity about what other people believe, and before the hour is up she has discovered how old I am, where I grew up and what it was like. She is adopting the word queer because young people tell her they prefer it to gay (although I still feel gay. You know why I like it? Because its happy, happy, happy). She genuinely wants to know why: why did millennials not trust Hillary Clinton? Why did women, any women, vote for Donald Trump? She slaps her hands together gleefully when she hits on a point she wants to emphasise, which is usually a life lesson about how people can be more kind to one another. At&#xa0;times, chatting to her is like being in a one-on-one TED Talk. Her positivity is utterly contagious.            The story of the Battle of the Sexes match is familiar, thanks to its place in the history of sport and the many documentaries that have been made about it, but some of its more gruesomely misogynistic details are shocking for a modern audience, not least the complete refusal of the tennis establishment to take the idea of a professional women game seriously. King is pleased that parts of the film will alarm a younger generation, for whom she has a great deal of respect. Im really optimistic about millennials, she beams. And the Gen Z, I dont know what you call them here  the ones that are 18, 19 now. In 2014, King founded the Billie Jean King Leadership Initiative, a non-profit organisation dedicated to promoting equality in the workplace. She says that, based on research it has carried out, this is the greatest generation on inclusion ever. And that gives me hope. Weve done all kinds of studies and it holds true that young people dont want to be in a workplace that doesnt have inclusion. Theyll leave work and go to another company if it has better inclusion. She starts to rap on the table, delivering a speech. Diversity is absolutely vital to her worldview. I&#xa0;think the kids that are younger are going to learn from millennials, and pick up on that, too, and I think this could probably save the world. She says this with such certainty that it feels mean-spirited to cast doubt on it, but I wonder if she still feels optimistic when the political establishment in the US and the UK feel so far away from that ethos. But some of the people in the establishment believe in inclusion, so you have to look at each person. King is big on trying to see the best in everyone, although she admits that, in one respect, during the 2016 presidential election, young people disappointed her  she feels they didnt use the internet as a research tool. These kids didnt know one thing about Hillary. Not one thing. They only knew that Bernie was yelling revolution! and free education!. Im like: Really? Whats his policy to pay for the free education? I dont know. Well, you guys, it takes money. All these things that you want, they take money. Youve got to be a little deeper in the weeds on this. Oh, my God, she says, exasperated. I&#xa0;would have given anything to have this technology at my fingertips. I would have loved it as a young person. But, use it! They didnt use it for the elections, not at all.     King is carried to the court for the Battle of the Sexes tennis match. Photograph: Bettmann Archive    Last month, King gave an interview that touched on Trump and said: Im upset with the white women that voted for Mr Trump. I think they really dont like themselves. The quote was widely reported, but she seems mortified today, calling it my biggest faux pas ever. Oh, you know what? I got that all wrong. It sounds so sexist. It wasnt about sexism  it was about gender. We were discussing the election and, of course, I got one little soundbite and I blew it on that. That was a big mistake I made. Of course I dont know what each person thinks. It was a statement, but it was a question. How can any women vote for Trump anyway, in my mind? Im just asking myself questions. She regrets the way she worded it then, but she is still asking the question now. When you heard him say all those things on the bus about women and how you can grab em? How do you justify that? I just wanna ask. One of Kings many big theories about life is that, through sport, women can learn how to navigate a world built by men. Men created the culture, not women, not really, she says, matter-of-factly. If youre in sports, you learn [about] the old-boy network. You learn how they think. It gives you a leg up every time. The lessons you learn in sports, you can use in your daily life. I&#xa0;use it every single day of my life. During the early rounds of promotion for Battle of the Sexes, King sat down with Emma Stone and Andrea Riseborough  who plays her hairdresser and lover, Marilyn Barnett  for a three-way interview. Stone mentioned that women were making 80 cents to every dollar earned by men, and King gently interrupted: White women. If youre African American or Hispanic, it goes down, and then Asian American women make 90 cents to the dollar. The internet applauded her intersectional feminism; Refinery29 compiled a video called Woke Moments from Billie Jean King. Yes! Thats great. They understood that. It was a black player, Althea Gibson, who changed Kings view of what being a winner meant. I think you have to see it to be it. Althea Gibson was the first women of colour to ever win a major. In 56, she won the French, 57&#xa0;and 58, she won Wimbledon. I got to see her as a 13-year-old and she changed my world because I knew what it looked like to be No&#xa0;1. She&#xa0;inspired me more than ever.     Emma Stone and Steve Carrell as King and Riggs. Photograph: Melinda Sue Gordon    Growing up in Long Beach, California, she was certain tennis would be her weapon. It&#xa0;would give me a platform, if I&#xa0;was good enough. Id have to be No&#xa0;1 and I knew as a girl it wouldnt be the same as a guy  its going to be harder, its going to be different. It is. We go unnoticed. King was a religious teenager, and her parents were homophobic. I wasnt comfortable in my own skin until I was 51, she says. It was a long haul. The movie was kind of the beginning stages of what I was going through. The sense of pressure on screen is palpable. Oh, so much pressure, to not be like that. And I love Larry. I married him thinking I was totally straight. Hes so gorgeous. He was gorgeous. We both were, I guess. Have you seen old photos of him? The conversation turns wonderfully gossipy. You wouldnt recognise him or me now. I fell in love with him across a room. I still would, probably. I&#xa0;dont know. I either like em really dark or really light. Ilana [Kings partner] is dark, my first boyfriend was really dark. Then Larry was blond. Im either one extreme or the other. I&#xa0;dont really understand it. Did it take her by surprise, then, to realise that she was attracted to women? Did she have no idea? I know a person who was with a guy and had two children, and [thought] she was totally straight. She was in her 40s, and now shes with women. That happens a lot. Or, I think more of us are fluid and can be with either. And theyd say: Thats bisexual. Well, I dont know. Im with Ilana  its going to be 38 years in October, so to me Im a lesbian right now. If something happened to Ilana, I dont know, Im always open. I prefer looking at mens bodies, though, she confides. I think women, its more of an emotional thing. Its physical, but its different. Whereas mens bodies, I love broad shoulders, I love that look. So, I dont know. Im not sure. Im a little screwed up, but its all right. At least Im open to everybody. Its her openness that makes King so persuasive; she is open to what everyone has to say, including her enemies. But then, you dont get to be the best female tennis player in the world without learning how to read your opponents.     King holds her trophy high after beating Riggs. Photograph: Bettmann Archive    In 1967, when she was 23 and at No&#xa0;1 in the rankings, King was profiled by the New York Times. Even then, she was rallying against the stuffiness of the tennis world. Oh, totally. Im always getting into trouble, she says. The writer referred to her as an ordinary, attractive young lady, and she laughs at the description. Take lots of photos in your 20s, save em, cos when youre old and wrinkly you can look back on em and go: Ah, I looked pretty good then. She catches herself. But were talking about body image again! Do guys think like this? I think guys do, a little bit more than they let on. She is pleased that, 50 years ago, she was complaining that the elitist club atmosphere was damaging to the sport and that it needed to be brought into public spaces such as parks, where everyone could feel welcome. She sounded remarkably contemporary. Thats what you have to do, be&#xa0;ahead&#xa0;of your time. Be ahead! King is hoping that the love story at the heart of the film will help others in areas where she could not be ahead of her time; as she says, she spent a number of years denying her sexuality. I&#xa0;hope [it] helps motivate kids, young people, to fight for equality and freedom, and for the LGBTQ+ community  She speaks the letters carefully, and then happily veers off track. I say plus because there are so many letters now, I cant keep up. We have this Q now, its questioning or queer. In my day, that would be the worst thing you could say. But I asked the younger ones, what do you like, and they like queer now. So Im starting to use queer, because theyre our future leaders. The film is a stark reminder of how much King was up against then, and how much women are still having to fight for recognition now, whether it is John McEnroes comments that Serena Williams would be ranked, like, 700 in the world in the mens game, or Novak Djokovic stumbling over the hormones and different stuff. King would like it to be of use to others. Maybe it will help them come out, but only come out when youre ready, she insists. Do not out people. In 1981, Marilyn Barnett sued King for what the tabloids salaciously called galimony, and outed her in the process. King lost her endorsements; the backlash was so strong as to be barely conceivable today. Young people today are probably like: Are you kidding? But even gay kids, or queer kids, didnt talk about our situation among ourselves. It was totally shame-based.   Related: Margaret Court: astounding champion who found God and lost the respect of a nation    Her Australian contemporary, Margaret Court, has also been openly hostile. A minor character in Battle of the Sexes, she is now a pentecostal pastor in Perth who has said that tennis is full of lesbians and that gay people are after our young ones. King smiles, although the two were once friends. [Margaret] believes in conversion, that if youre gay you can turn around. Not happening, nice try. No. Were all Gods children  accept us the way we are, as long as were not hurting others. When she said that trans children are from the devil  you dont do that. Dont hurt my community like that. I&#xa0;think we need to have a hard talk, and ask hard questions. Hard talk and hard questions seem to be what King thrives on. Still, she isnt sure quite why she has spent much of her life trying to change the world. I dont know. Ive always been this way, since I was a kid. Its just, do you want to build goodness and a better world, or do you want to tear it down? You decide."
"35""LGBT charities and campaigners have welcomed the Church of Englands new guidance for schools urging them to refrain from making pupils conform to gender stereotypes. The updated guidance for the churchs 4,700 schools, titled Valuing All Gods Children, and timed to coincide with anti-bullying week, followed advice issued three years ago that covered homophobic bullying. It has now been expanded to include transphobic and biphobic bullying.   Related: The Daily Mails boys in tiaras story is designed to manufacture rage | Suzanne Moore    The guidance met with outrage in some quarters, drawing sceptical newspaper headlines and furious commentary from some conservatives. But the human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell said the guidance was big progress for a church that traditionally and historically has been hostile to LGBT rights. The new guidance is positive, Tatchell said. It affirms diverse sexual orientations and gender identities, supporting pupils who are different. It acknowledges their right to explore, experiment and express without denigration. The church had advised that nursery and primary school should be a time of creative exploration. Children should be at liberty to explore the possibilities of who they might be without judgment or derision, it said. For example, a child may choose the tutu, princesss tiara and heels and/or the firemans helmet, toolbelt and superhero cloak without expectation or comment. Conservative Christian activists, including Andrea Minichiello Williams of Christian Concern  an evangelical member of the C of Es parliament  condemned the new rules and accused the church of pursuing an agenda that runs counter to the churchs teaching. On Monday, Piers Morgan, who co-hosts ITVs Good Morning Britain, also criticised what he called a new fad. Ive got a six-year-old girl, she doesnt know what gender identity is, yet teachers are now asking a five-year-old child: How are you feeling today? Do you feel male or female? Morgan said. Its not about judgment, its about having some sort of boundaries.    &#39;A child may choose the tutu, princess&#39;s tiara and heels and/or the fireman&#39;s helmet, tool belt and superhero cloak without expectation or comment&#39; - The Church of England has told to schools to let pupils experiment with gender. What do you think?&mdash; Good Morning Britain (@GMB) November 13, 2017    Morgan said children needed boundaries instead of a free for all when it came to identity, to which his co-host Susanna Reid said: Im definitely one day just going to come in one morning identifying as something completely different. Morgan responded: You know what, youre allowed to, you can identify as a giraffe if you want [] You know what, were all going to be fluid. Were all going to be giraffes. But LGBT campaigners expressed surprise at the outrage. Paris Lees, the journalist and transgender rights activist, wrote on Twitter:     I was bullied violently at school. Like many LGBT kids, home wasn&#39;t always much better. But being anti-bullying is apparently now part of some evil trans agenda  according to &#39;news&#39; papers that fail to even report on suicide stats for trans youth. Disgraceful. #AntiBullyingWeek pic.twitter.com/mMZMy9P3ea&mdash; Paris Lees (@parislees) November 13, 2017    She added: Why on earth should a boy be criticised for wearing a tiara if thats what he wants to do? What is the big deal? A Stonewall spokesperson said the charity warmly welcomed the guidance. All bullying has a profoundly negative impact on children, and it is never acceptable. Our research shows that nearly half of lesbian, gay, bi and trans pupils are bullied for being LGBT at school: a situation that desperately needs to change. We would like to congratulate the church for sending a clear signal that homophobic, biphobic and transphobic bullying must never be tolerated. As the archbishop of Canterbury says in his foreword: This guidance helps schools to offer the Christian message of love, joy and the celebration of our humanity without exception or exclusion. That should be a message we can all get behind. In a note on Facebook on Monday, Nigel Genders, the chief education officer at the Church of England, explained why the guidance was part of the churchs vision. One in 10 pupils who are transgender have received death threats, he wrote. Can you imagine how that can impact on a young life? More frequent is marginalising through social exclusion, cyberbullying, verbal and physical abuse. No parent, friend, teacher or governor would wish this on their own and it is incumbent on us as Christians to act to create welcoming schools where all pupils are honoured and respected members of their community. Without this fundamental element how can we enable all our children to flourish?    Why our guidance on combating bullying is part of our vision for education. Read more in this blog from Nigel Genders, Chief Education Officer at the Church of England: Church of England (@c_of_e) November 13, 2017    Last summer, the General Synod voted to offer special services to welcome transgender people to the Anglican faith. It was the second time in two days that it gave overwhelming support to motions seen as positive towards LGBT people, suggesting to some a significant change of mood. The motion said transgender people should be welcomed and affirmed in their parish church, and that bishops consider whether special liturgies might be prepared to mark a persons gender transition. Proposing the motion, Chris Newlands cited data from the Tavistock and Portman NHS foundation trust, which said that in 2010, 97 children in the UK were referred to gender identity clinics, but by 2016 the number had risen to 1,400. In the UK, transphobic hate crime has risen by 170% in the past year, he said. Tatchell said there was still some way to go, and while the new school guidance was welcome, it failed to resolve the churchs big failings on LGBT human rights: its refusal to sanction same-sex marriages and its non-acceptance of clergy in loving committed same-sex relationships.  The phrase cloaks of identity, he added, may not have been the best language to use, as it implies something additional and artificial that covers the true reality underneath. For many LGBT pupils, dressing to express their sexuality or gender identity is not a cloak but an expression of their true selves."
"36""Top story: Falling short all over Westminster Hello, its Warren Murray with your TGIF briefing. An alleged lewd comment to the Commons leader, Andrea Leadsom, was one of the reasons Michael Fallon had to resign as defence secretary, it has emerged. Allies of Fallon have said he fundamentally denies making the comment about where Leadsom might put her hands to warm them up. Leadsom is now in charge of cleaning up the Commons and has warned MPs it is appropriate for them to lose ministerial posts or the party whip, or for parliamentary staff to lose their jobs, in cases of sexual harassment. I am setting the bar significantly below criminal activity. If people are made to feel uncomfortable, that is not correct. Theresa May has faced a Tory outcry after rocketing her 41-year-old chief whip, Gavin Williamson, into the defence ministry. Some Conservative MPs openly criticised the decision to reward a key lieutenant with the senior post rather than carry out a broader reshuffle of her fractious cabinet.  On the Labour side, the Luton North MP Kelvin Hopkins has been suspended from the party while it investigates a claim of sexual advances towards a party activist. The Commons speaker, John Bercow, has written to the party leaders instructing them to provide their sexual harassment policies for publication. Bercow told the house he expected the parties to take as much responsibility as parliament for properly dealing with sexual misconduct complaints. * * * Bradys ashes dumped  The Moors murderer Ian Brady, who died in May, has been secretly cremated and buried at sea, it can now be revealed. A judge had Bradys body incinerated without ceremony, then the ashes were put in a weighted urn and, at 2.30am on Thursday of last week, dropped overboard somewhere off Liverpool. Brady tortured and murdered five children in the 1960s along with Myra Hindley, who died in prison in 2002. Greater Manchester police have finished an audit of the case after Bradys death and expressed regret after finding they had left jaw bone and hair samples of Brady victim Pauline Reade in storage at the University of Leeds. Her remains were found on Saddleworth Moor in 1987. The GMP said: This is a deeply sensitive matter and understandably it has caused some upset with the family  we have given them a number of options, all of which GMP will pay for. * * * Interesting timing  The interest rate rise happened as expected, with the Bank of England lifting the cost of borrowing back up to 0.5%. But our financial editor, Nils Pratley asks: why now? The UK is in the very odd position of cutting rates a year ago to deal with a Brexit whack that didnt happen, but now raising rates when the Brexit risks to the economy feel more real and immediate. We have a very user-friendly Q&amp;A on what 0.25 percentage points more in interest means for home owners, buy-to-let borrowers and savers. * * * Tweet serenity  What did you do with those 11 minutes when Donald Trumps Twitter account stopped working? The social network did little to convince anyone when it said the @realDonaldTrump handle was inadvertently deactivated  due to human error by a Twitter employee. The twitterati cried FAKE NEWS! and soon enough it emerged the account had been taken offline by a Twitter customer support employee who did this on the employees last day. The company has promised a full internal review. * * * Skirting the issue  Is it really necessary for a young women to question her gender identity in order to wear trousers? School dress codes may be slowly adapting to the acceptance of different gender identities  but after 42 years of sex discrimination laws, why are schools still able to force girls who identify as girls to wear skirts? Barrister Anna Macey argues it is flat-out discrimination  trousers are warmer in winter, more practical on the way to and from school, and more modest when sitting down or playing. Its time every schoolgirl and her parents challenged sexist policies, and fought for the right of women of all ages to wear trousers. * * * Robbery under the high seas  We have a quite stunning immersive feature today on the plundering of second world war shipwrecks by undersea scrap metal merchants. Crews pretending to be fishermen have scavenged the waters around Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia, desecrating the graves of thousands of British, American, Australian, Dutch and Japanese servicemen from the second world war.     HMS Exeter, one of the wartime shipwrecks that has been plundered. Photograph: Stanley Sherman/Getty Images    The grave robbers may be targeting these older wrecks because they contain low-background metals  forged before the nuclear testing era, virtually free of radiation and therefore highly prized for some scientific, medical and space applications. It is a crime against history and the war dead, says maritime archaeologist James Hunter: You may as well just go into a war cemetery and dig it up. Lunchtime read: Three degrees of devastation Is the goal of limiting global warming to 2C slipping out of reach? With UN climate negotiators meeting for talks next week, latest projections warn the world is heading towards a 3.2C temperature rise by the year 2100.     South Beach, Miami, if global temperatures rise to predicted levels. Photograph: Nickolay Lamm/Climate Central    If it came true, the Egyptian jewel of Alexandria, Brazils postcard city of Rio de Janeiro and the Japanese economic powerhouse of Osaka are among areas that would be flooded by rising seas. Much, much closer to home, Lincolnshires coast and farms would sink, changing the entire shape of eastern England forever. A special Guardian investigation has found that efforts to stop this happening are patchy at best, making the coming Bonn summit crucial. Sport As Joe Root puts the troubles of Englands buildup to the Ashes behind him and prepares for his first match as captain  at any level  overseas, he has called on his team to create a winning habit and be ruthless on their tour of Australia. Following the release of the match schedule, Eddie Jones has said the 2019 Rugby World Cup will differ from its predecessors and hopes his extensive local knowledge will assist his squad in the tournament. Another England coach, Gareth Southgate, has warned his players that nobody should feel safe about their positions after a day of extensive changes to his latest squad. Patrice Evra brought back memories of Eric Cantona after being sent off for aiming a kick at a Marseille supporter before his sides Europa League game at Vitria de Guimares. Elsewhere, Arsenal progressed despite a goalless draw with Red Star Belgrade while Evertons misery deepened as they crashed out following a heavy defeat in Lyon. And the mayor of Hamilton in New Zealand has called for calm ahead of the Rugby League World Cup game between Tonga and Samoa following a number of clashes between the two sets of fans this week. Business The Asian markets have been flat-ish this morning though stocks in Apple have been anything but. Reuters reports that Apple reached new heights (the company is now nearing $900bn in market capitalisation) after it forecast holiday sales would beat market expectations. The iPhone X is launching today. The pound has been pummelled, falling against the dollar, euro and other major currencies despite yesterdays interest rate rise. Overnight it was buying $1.30 and 1.12.  The papers Its another day of sex scandals on the front of most papers.     Front page of the Guardian, 3 November 2017.    The Sun follows up on the Michael Fallon resignation saying that a comment he made to fellow cabinet minister Andrea Leadsom may have sealed his downfall. The Guardian highlights the reaction from fellow Tories to the unbelievable, ludicrous, astonishing appointment of the new defence secretary Gavin Williamson. The Times follows that theme with the headline May under fire after key ally gets defence job. The i has a similar headline and says there is despair in Tory ranks. The Telegraph says the PM is planning for a succession in Downing Street and the appointment of Williamson as defence secretary puts him firmly in the race. The Mirror splashes with the news that police have secretly kept body parts of one of Moors murderer Ian Bradys victims for the past 30 years. The FT stays with ... business. It predicts the decision of the Bank of England to raise interest rates is not the end of the story. Lastly the Express says there are 56,000 migrants on the run in the UK. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Morning Briefing by email, bright and early every weekday, sign up here."
"37""Top story: President and wife on way out  but what comes next? 
Good morning, its Warren Murray with the news you need to start your Thursday. 
It looks to be the end for Robert Mugabes 37-year rule in Zimbabwe after the military put the despotic president under house arrest. As our story says, few other than the close associates who benefited directly from Mugabes rule will mourn his passing from power. This morning our Africa correspondent, Jason Burke, explains for you how a rare tactical error by the president brought him to grief. 
Mugabe, 93, was trying to install his unpopular wife, Grace Mugabe, as his successor. His removal of the vice-president, Emmerson Mnangagwa, proved the last straw for the military, which has carried out a remarkably low-key takeover. There has been no sign of resistance to either the coup, or the arrest of a series of senior officials associated with Grace Mugabe and her G40 faction. 
Mugabe is assumed to be still in military custody and speculation has turned to how he will be replaced. Some predict he will resign this week and Mnangagwa will take charge, possibly with opposition leaders installed as vice-president and prime minister. But there are warnings that the former spy chief Mnangagwa is every bit as iron-fisted as the man he might replace. Nelson Chamisa, the deputy head of the opposition MDC party, has urged respect for peace, constitutionalism, democratisation, the rule of law and the sanctity of human life as the transition takes place. 
Mugabes misrule has left Zimbabwe short of cash and struggling to pay for imports owing to a shortage of dollars. State employees, including some soldiers and police, have gone for months without payment of their salaries, deepening discontent with the government. 
* * * 
Historic moment  Leonardo da Vincis long-lost painting Salvator Mundi has sold for $450.3m, a world record for any auctioned work of art. The buyer is unknown but the seller was Dmitry Rybolovlev, a Russian fertiliser oligarch. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
The only Leonardo in private hands, the work commissioned by King Louis XII of France more than 500 years ago had long been presumed lost. It changed hands for $10,000 at an estate sale in the US in 2005 and was subsequently authenticated. The winning bid at the Christies auction in New York was $400m, while the standard auction house premium added a trifling $50.3m to the price. 
* * * 
Cancer drugs approved  Thousands of women with breast cancer will benefit from new drugs on the NHS that delay the progress of the disease. The medications, called palbociclib and ribociclib, have been shown to slow the progression of advanced cancer by at least 10 months and can delay the need for chemotherapy, giving women the chance to live a normal life for longer. It is estimated about 8,000 people in England will be eligible for treatment with either palbociclib or ribociclib each year. 
* * * 
NO OPTION BUT TO ASK YOU TO LEAVE  A landlord in Grimsby says this is not a threat to tenants, but a reminder to make sure the six-week universal credit delay doesnt put them behind in their rent. Jeremy Corbyn quoted from the letter during PMQs, asking: Will the prime minister pause universal credit so it can be fixed? Or does she think it is right to put thousands of families through Christmas in the trauma of knowing they are about to be evicted because they are in rent arrears because of universal credit? May replied she would look at the issue of this particular case but the government wanted people to be able to manage their own budgets. 
* * * 
Undermining our democracy  More evidence has emerged of fake Russian-run Twitter accounts seeking to influence UK politics. Thousands of Russia-based accounts posted more than 45,000 messages about Brexit in just 48 hours during last years referendum, UK academics believe, and more than 13,000 of those accounts disappeared after the ballot. Parliaments intelligence watchdog is set to reconvene to investigate  in an interesting twist the chief Tory Brexit mutineer Dominic Grieve is likely to return as its chairman.  
* * * 
Shepard vs Fox  A Fox News anchor has enraged viewers by demolishing the networks own story about the Clinton uranium scandal. Fox has made much of the revived allegations that while she was secretary of state, Hillary Clinton approved a deal to sell US uranium mining interests to Russia  in return for a $140m donation to the Clinton Foundation. The anchor, Shepard Smith, showed how the story was inaccurate in a number of ways and Clinton had no say over the deal. Conservatives fumed on Twitter: Get Shepard Smith off of Fox. Hes arrogant and doing his own spin. Nobody knows how deep the lefts conspiracy goes and so on and so forth. 
* * * 
Seasoned journalism  Guess its time for the Briefing to decide how to approach its first Christmas and the deluge of gift guides, turducken tutorials and such that Guardian colleagues are starting to churn out. Lets open the bidding with this guide to the best winter light festivals around the UK  a bit of light reading for you ho ho. And heres the open-and-shut case against luxury advent calendars. We promise not to drive you completely crackers with this stuff sorry cant stop please help me  
Lunchtime read: Take Friday off  every week 
The liberation of workers from excessive work was one of the pioneering demands of the labour movement  It is a cause that urgently needs reclaiming. Owen Jones today makes the case for a four-day week, arguing it would bring health, social, economic and environmental benefits. 
 
  
  
  A four-day week could mean dads doing more of this sort of thing. 
  Photograph: SolStock/Getty Images 
  
 
We would be less prone to depression and strokes, more productive, and have a smaller carbon footprint. Gender equality would benefit from men being more available to help around the home. But apart from that, we simply work too much these days. Work can be a fulfilling activity for some  but few would disagree with the notion that we should spend more time with our families, watching our children grow, exercising, reading books, or just relaxing.  
Sport 
World rugby has been left embarrassed and in disarray after France was announced as the surprise host of the 2023 Rugby World Cup, prompting accusations of horse-trading and a power struggle at the heart of the sports governing body. Meanwhile, Owen Farrell is being tipped to drive a sharply improved England performance as Eddie Jones prepares to recall his rested Lion against Australia on Saturday. 
Sir Bradley Wiggins has claimed his life was made a living hell because of a malicious witch-hunt into the contents of a bag delivered to him at the 2011 Critrium du Dauphin. The affair, known as Jiffy-gate, has been a costly mess that leaves all parties neither damned nor cleared, writes Sean Ingle. And the Derbyshire all-rounder Shiv Thakor has been found guilty of exposing himself to two women on a housing estate. 
Business 
Rupert Murdoch saw off a shareholder rebellion at the annual general meeting of his 21st Century Fox entertainment group in Los Angeles overnight. But the investor pushback against the groups controversial dual-class voting structure, which ensures Murdoch family control, won 43% of the votes. At News Corps AGM, also in LA last night, Murdoch admitted digital advertising had been tremendously damaging to his print empire and that some of his newspapers were struggling. 
Asian share markets were mostly up overnight and the FTSE100 is set to rise 0.2% this morning. The pound has been trading at $1.317 and 1.118. 
The papers 
Its Zimbabwe all the way for most of the newspaper front pages this morning, with the Guardian, Times, Telegraph, Financial Times, the i and Metro all focused on the low-key coup that is loosening President Robert Mugabes grip on power. 
 
  
  
  Guardian front page, Thursday 16 November 2017 
  
 
The Daily Mail is still concerned about the so-called Brexit mutineers, serving up a page-one warning: Dont betray your voters! The Scottish governments legal victory over minimum alcohol pricing leads the Scotsman; Englands school funding cuts occupy the Mirror. And the Sun starts your morning with photos taken between late 2013 and this April of BBC News channel workers napping on their night shifts. 
For more news: www.theguardian.com 
Sign up 
The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here."
"38""Top story: Base rate poised to bounce back to 0.5% 
Hello, its Warren Murray pointing you in the right direction this morning.  
Britain is today anticipating its first interest rate rise in more than a decade as the Bank of England moves to end an era of rock-bottom borrowing costs. The official rate is widely predicted to return to its pre-Brexit referendum level of 0.5% on the back of strong industrial performance and the lowest unemployment figures in 40 years. At the same time, the Bank will want to rein in high inflation, which reached 3% in September, and curb a surge in consumer borrowing, according to analysts. 
The predicted rise in the cost of borrowing by 0.25 percentage points obviously has its downsides  such as increased mortgage repayments for the 5 million people with variable home loans. Some analysts have warned the positive indicators driving this rise could be short-lived. The retail sector is feeling a downturn in high-street sales. Deutsche Bank has predicted that weak household income, slowing jobs growth and stalled house prices will cut Britains GDP growth from 1.6% in 2017 to 1% in 2018. 
And there is more than one way to judge a countrys prosperity. Child poverty in Britain is about to reach record levels, affecting 5.2 million children over the next five years, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies, as welfare cuts hit young and poor families the hardest. While at current rates of progress women wont reach pay equality with men for 217 years, says the World Economic Forum. 
* * * 
My previous conduct fell short  Michael Fallon has cited the need to set a good example for the military after resigning as Theresa Mays defence minister over claims made in the Westminster sexual harassment scandal. But other Tory ministers have hit back  they include Dominic Raab, who said a spreadsheet being circulated contained false and malicious material. Some of those listed as victims have disowned the allegations that are attributed to them. In the wider world of public life and celebrity, the actor Dustin Hoffman has apologised after a female writer said he repeatedly groped and humiliated her with sexual remarks in 1985, when she was 17; while the Old Vic theatre has been accused of ignoring years of lecherous behaviour by Kevin Spacey towards young males.  
* * * 
Followed Isis instructions to a T  The Uzbek national charged over the New York attack wanted to display the Islamic State flag in his hospital room, authorities say. Sayfullo Saipov, 29, was shot and arrested by a heroic NYPD officer after a pick-up truck ran down eight people. He has been brought into federal court in a wheelchair, handcuffed and with his feet shackled, to face terrorism and other charges. Saipov was a fervent Isis supporter who watched scores of its horrific videos, and rented a truck on 22 October to practise for the attack, says the criminal complaint. 
 
  
   
    
  
  
 
The attack killed five people from Argentina, one from Belgium and two Americans  the only New York resident among them was 23-year-old Nicholas Cleves, a software engineer and web developer. Nine survivors remained in serious or critical condition last night, some having lost limbs. New Yorkers have taken in the news and got on with their lives, with joggers and cyclists diverting around the sealed-off route of Saipovs attack. 
* * * 
Osama files  Documents released by the CIA suggest Osama bin Laden didnt think much of Shakespeare and felt as a child that the British seemed loose and decadent. Journal notes detailing his time in the UK when he was 13 include an account of visiting Stratford-upon-Avon and the Bards house. I was not impressed and I saw that they were a society different from ours and that they were a morally loose society. The notes were seized during the 2011 Pakistan raid in which US special forces killed the al-Qaida leader. Bin Laden wrote that his age had not allowed him to form a complete picture of British life  judging from other things the navy Seals grabbed, he might have tried to fill the gaps in his knowledge with Mr Bean videos, episodes of Wallace and Gromit, and more than 30 videos on crocheting. 
* * * 
Boris goes to Washington  The foreign secretary is to urge US senators against scuppering the Iran nuclear deal as he visits Capitol Hill next week. Donald Trump hates the 2015 pact, which limits Tehrans development of nuclear fuel and technology in return for lifted sanctions and greater international engagement. Boris Johnson says the amazing triumph of diplomacy has its failings but must not be allowed to fail. Johnson is also likely to raise the US Treasurys slapping of massive trade tariffs on Bombardier aircraft from Northern Ireland, and to put out feelers about a post-Brexit trade deal  he warned that the US will strike a very hard bargain. 
* * * 
English enters a new phrase  The Collins Dictionary has made fake news its word of the year. It does seem like the phrase has already been rendered meaningless by overuse, misuse and, especially, you-know-whos dishonest use of it to condemn anything the media puts out that he doesnt like. The Collins has also added fidget spinner, gig economy, Insta and cuffing season to its corpus in what has clearly been a golden year in the storied evolution of the English language.  
Lunchtime read: How double-barrelled became hoi polloi  
Giving the children both your last names is no longer the preserve of the posh  today, 11% of average newlyweds are doing the double-barrelled thing and passing it on to the next generation. 
 
  
  
  Ask these people their surname and you are liable to get both barrels. 
  Composite: Rex/Getty 
  
 
So why is this proliferating? Should you hyphenate, or not? And what happens when your children have children? Unwieldy concatenations might work for someone like Richard Montagu-Stuart-Wortley-Mackenzie but only because hes got 5th Earl of Wharnclife in front of the whole mess. Paula Cocozza looks into the politics and practicalities of compound surnames.  
Sport 
Trevor Bayliss has written off hopes of Ben Stokess involvement in the Ashes, leaving the England coach to draw up contingency plans without the all-rounder. Mauricio Pochettino has challenged his Tottenham Hotspur players to take the club to the next level and start winning trophies on the back of their victory over Real Madrid  a result that saw the clubs English core put Reals stars in the shade. Elsewhere in the Champions League, Sergio Agero wrote his name into the record books by registering his 178th goal for Manchester City in their win against Napoli, while Mohamed Salah opened up Maribor in a 3-0 win for Liverpool that was a reward for patience, self-belief and experience. 
Chris Robshaw has criticised the behaviour of his erstwhile Harlequins team-mate Marland Yarde, saying his club will be better off without the wing, who has signed for Sale after being shown the door at the Stoop for repeatedly missing training. And the crisis facing the Paralympic movement over alleged abuse of the classification system deepened yesterday after claims swimmers are deliberately exaggerating their disability in order to win more medals. 
Business 
The big business news will be the Bank of Englands rates decision. But before that shares on Asian markets touched 10-year highs on Thursday amid optimism expressed by the US Federal Reserve about the American economy. 
Overnight the pound was buying US$1.33 and 1.14. 
The papers 
Front pages are dominated by the fallout from Fallon. Although the Mirror isnt sure which is the bigger story  the defence minister resigning or Dustin Hoffman being accused of unwanted sexual advances. The front page is split in half but the main headline is Fallon quits as defence sec in sex storm. 
 
  
  
  Guardian front page, Thursday 2 November 2017. 
  
 
The Sun goes with Fallon his sword and, not content with that dubious pun, decides on the headline Grabuate to describe the Dustin Hoffman sex allegation story. The Mail has opted for a headline that almost appears to be in mourning  white on black, rather than black on white. Commons sex furore: the first scalp it blasts. The Guardian splashes with Fallon too, saying that a replacement for the cabinet minister is expected to be named today. Fallon resigns as new sleaze allegations emerge, says the Times, adding that another unnamed Tory MP has been accused of groping a female worker. The Telegraph says the Conservatives have fallen into a new sleaze crisis. 
Finally the FT has Fallon on the front  but it leads with a story about a British peer accusing HSBC of possible criminal complicity in an alleged money-laundering scandal involving South Africas wealthy Gupta family. 
Sign up 
If you would like to receive the Guardian Morning Briefing by email bright and early every weekday, sign up here."
"39""The government has for the first time committed to ensuring that a specific percentage of public appointees should be women and people from ethnic minority groups.  The Cabinet Office has said that within five years, half of all 5,500 existing public appointees should be females and 14% people from ethnic minorities. Its previous aspiration, made in 2013, was that 50% of new appointees should be women. The launch of the plan marks the first time that the government has published data on the status of diversity across all public appointments. Of the 5,500 public appointees currently in post, 43% are female and 10% are from ethnic minorities. The move will inevitably lead to claims that the government has set its first quota system following years of failing to bring representation on public boards in line with the wider population. A public body, often referred to as a quango, is an organisation that delivers a public service, is not a government department and operates at arms length from ministers. As well as quangos, the new commitment will cover large public institutions, such as the British Museum. Some progress has already been made in increasing gender diversity among new public appointees. In 2016/17, the proportion of new public appointments going to women rose to 49% from 34% in 2013/14, and 96% of all shortlists in 2016/17 were made up of both male and female candidates. The announcement comes as the Cabinet Office unveiled a 10-point diversity action plan to deliver its commitments.  These include establishing a mentoring programme and developing a charter which will set standards for inclusivity for chairs and their boards. Other plans include increasing the visibility of people from underrepresented groups who are already in public posts, for example through outreach events, and social media. Another is to improve consistency in how data on the issue is collected and monitored. The minister for the constitution, Chris Skidmore, said: Theres more we need to do across all aspects of diversity. Today we published a diversity action plan which sets out how we will make public appointments even more open and accessible to all.  We need diverse ideas and perspectives at the helm of our public bodies, so it is vital that public appointees truly reflect the society they serve. Peter Riddell, the commissioner for public appointments, said: The activities outlined in the plan are key to encouraging more diverse fields of applicants to apply for positions on public boards. Success will require a sustained will on the part of ministers, departments and public bodies. Natalie Campbell, who is on the board of the Big Lottery Fund, said that as a 34-year-old state school-educated women from a minority ethnic background, she felt definitely a rarity in such positions, though matters were improving. Around the table it is a rarity, but every year Im seeing more and more women coming through, she said. Im seeing more and more women of colour coming through, and more women from different socio-economic backgrounds, and thats equally important.  Campbell, who also holds some chair positions, said she applied three times to the Big Lottery Fund before being accepted. She said: I think a lot of people either dont apply or they stop at the first hurdle, when they get the first no. The board, she said, was more mixed than most, which was vital given its work awarding almost 1bn a year in funds: To not have diversity around the table means that we wouldnt ultimately be making the best possible use of that funding, because theres one type of person determining the strategy of the organisation."
"40""Easier gender changes on birth certificates. Preventing unnecessary surgery on intersex children. Gender education in schools and LGBTI acceptance in aged care. 
These are just some of the LGBTI causes raised as priorities by Australian community leaders and activists keen to keep the ball rolling after the passage of marriage equality legislation. 
A fact often lost in the postal survey debate is that marriage equality is not the be-all and end-all for queer people, for the simple reason that many are opposite-sex attracted and could already marry  particularly people who are bisexual, trans or intersex. 
 
  Related: The marriage equality movement had ordinary people doing the extraordinary | Rodney Croome  
 
But now one of the last forms of discrimination before the law of gay and lesbian Australians has been lifted it remains to be seen if theres enough solidarity to bank the win and move on to the next fight. 
Anna Brown, the Equality Campaign co-chair, played a pivotal role in the marriage equality campaign and says its now time to refocus on trans and intersex rights and gender diversity issues. 
Its only appropriate given how much these groups were targeted by the no campaign, she says. As a movement we have a responsibility to stand by them and make sure theyre not left behind  to amplify their voices. 
Whether it was the Coalition for Marriages ads about gender education or Cory Bernardi criticising a charity day allowing boys to wear dresses, much of the opposition to marriage equality had little to do with homosexuality. Brown suggests trans and gender diverse people were collateral damage in the campaign. 
The executive director of Transgender Victoria, Sally Goldner, says the no campaign displayed gross prejudice by implying there is something wrong with gender diversity when, of course, it just is [diverse]. 
 
  
  
  Alex Greenwich and Anna Brown face the media in September. Brown says its now time to refocus on trans and intersex rights. 
  Photograph: James Ross/EPA 
  
 
Brown, the director of advocacy at the Human Rights Law Centre, is on a mission to remove every last stain of discrimination from the statute books.  
She cites overturning the ban on same-sex adoption in the Northern Territory and access to assisted reproductive technology in Western Australia and the NT as the next cabs off the rank. 
One change that is directly related to marriage is forced trans divorce. All states and territories except South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory require trans people to get divorced before they can change their gender on their birth certificates. 
For people including the Greens LGBTI spokeswomen, Janet Rice, and her wife, Penny, the laws create an agonising choice between preserving ones marriage or officially changing gender. 
Penny will wait for the law to change before changing her gender, but Rice says legislation of marriage equality is already having a normalising effect for them. 
Penny and I have gone from being one of the very few same-sex couples legally married to being joined by thousands of others who had overseas marriages, she says. 
Although marriage equality is a big step forward for gay and lesbian Australians in particular, many of the issues affecting the trans and intersex community have little to do with saying I do. 
 
  
  
  Victorian Greens senator Janet Rice with her wife, Penny. 
  Photograph: Julian Meehan Photography 
  
 
Goldner represents trans and bisexual communities and points to the urgent need to flatten out disparities in mental health for these groups. 
She says trans people and bisexual women are more likely to be homeless and on the receiving end of domestic violence. 
She adds the need to make it easier to change gender on birth certificates, noting that only the ACT and SA allow changes without gender reassignment surgery. 
That means in six states and territories children cant change their birth certificate, even with parental consent. 
The family court has allowed children to undergo stage-two hormone treatment without going to court, with parental and doctors consent, but Goldner says adults still face huge out-of-pocket costs to transition gender. 
Thats often something that stops people living life as their authentic self, she says. 
The trans activist Kate Doak identifies the mental health needs of trans youth as the priority, citing the high rate of attempted suicide by trans children. 
Any form of program which responsibly prevents bullying, reduces instances of anxiety and depression needs to be the focus, she says. 
 
  Related: Young Aboriginal LGBTI people are killing themselves. We need to protect them | Allan Clarke  
 
Rice says the Greens will be particularly focused on removing prejudice against trans people, citing the need to ensure equality in spheres such as sport and education. She says initiatives such as the anti-bullying program Safe Schools are exactly the sort of program to end a culture of bullying and discrimination. 
Morgan Carpenter, the executive co-director of Organisation Intersex International Australia, says the key demand for the intersex community is for a prohibition of deferrable medical interventions, including surgery and hormone treatments, that alter the sex characteristics of infants and children without their consent. 
Many of us have experienced medical interventions to make our bodies appear more typically female or male, without our informed consent, Carpenter says. We know that such practices remain routine in Australian hospitals. 
Labors LGBTI spokeswomen, Terri Butler, points to the partys 2015 platform which includes key demands including greater training for healthcare workers, removing out-of-pocket health expenses for transgender people and preventing unnecessary surgery on intersex children. 
Labor wasted no time after marriage equality legislation passed, announcing a $53m package to combat HIV, including adding preventive medicine, PrEP, to the pharmaceutical benefits scheme. 
Both Butler and Rice cite treatment of LGBTI people in aged care as a priority, noting that the government has reviewed the sector but more needs to be done to train staff and make aged care inclusive. 
While marriage has been the exclusive focus for the Equality Campaign, the long list of causes to fight for raises the question: can it turn its guns on other sources of inequality? Who is going to do the work? 
Carpenters answer is simple: the same activists and organisations that have always campaigned separately or together on lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and intersex rights, which he says are not new or newly significant after marriage equality. 
 
  
  
  A marriage equality march in Sydney attended by 30,000 people. The Equality Campaign has a massive database and social media following. 
  Photograph: Jonny Weeks for the Guardian 
  
 
 He disputes the idea there is an LGBTI rights movement in Australia, characterising it more as different people and organisations involved in different campaigns and movements. 
Although the Equality Campaign was built for the marriage fight in Australia it would be an invaluable resource for further campaigns, with a massive database and social media following. 
Brown says it engaged a new generation of activists and campaigners. She foreshadows consultation in the new year to determine if they are motivated only by a particular cause or have the appetite to mobilise around broader LGBTI issues. 
She says she will be disappointed if the movement loses the goodwill, support and membership database built by the campaign. 
Australian Marriage Equalitys co-chair, Alex Greenwich, said the campaign had been about empowering people and Id like to see that continue. 
That could be through supporting other LGBTI causes, [or] supporting international campaigns for marriage equality and we have an immediate task at hand with the the Ruddock [religious freedom] inquiry to make sure that has no perverse impacts on the historic marriage equality vote, he said. 
Advocates want to avoid the re-emergence of proposed amendments to refuse weddings that were defeated in the same-sex marriage bill debate and Greenwich wants the review to reflect that religious freedom should not be seen as competing with LGBTI equality. 
We will work hard to protect the gains weve made, to work for new gains and to support the international effort. 
Greenwich, the independent state MP for Sydney, says he is working to remove forced trans divorce provisions and wants a review of discrimination laws which still allow schools to discriminate based on sexuality. 
Another local cause is to address the high no vote in western Sydney. Greenwich says the campaign should be supporting the LGBTI communities there and resourcing the multicultural communities to have important conversations  about how LGBTI people are part of every community. 
Greenwich is already back at work, spending the week after Australia became the 25th country in the world to legislate marriage equality at a conference for gay and lesbian legislators in the US. 
Weve had a lot of setbacks and many lessons to learn throughout this campaign, he says. I am keen to support other marriage equality campaigns including in Japan, Vietnam, China, in South America including Peru and a few European jurisdictions like Italy. 
 
  
  Were all the same in the sense that weve all faced the same marginalisation 
   
   Jason Tuazon-McCheyne, Better Together conference 
   
  
 
Another international project, mentioned by Brown, is the treatment of LGBTI asylum seekers, particularly pressing given that Australia sends gay male asylum seekers to Papua New Guinea, which has criminal laws against homosexuality. 
Goldner says some bisexual and trans people felt left out by the marriage equality campaign, as some volunteers had talked about the need for equality specifically for gay and lesbian Australians. 
She suggests some sort of major roundtable to thrash this out privately to allow LGBTI Australians to talk in a safe process and to remind everyone about the need for equality for all. 
The LGBTI rights movement should be more like a powerboard, Goldner says, with the shared value of equality like the wall socket that charges us all but is able to power up to five plugs at once. 
One innovation in this space is the Better Together conference organised by the Equality Project (unrelated to the same-sex marriage Equality Campaign), which aspires to be the new voice for LGBTI Australians. 
The conference will be structured around caucuses for lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, people of colour and queer Indigenous people to discuss their priorities. 
The executive director of the project, Jason Tuazon-McCheyne, says the time is right to restart a national gathering of LGBTI organisations and people in the vein of homosexual conferences that occurred in the 1970s and 80s. 
 
  Related: Marriage equality is important, but let's not forget homeless LGBTI youth | Matthew Abbey  
 
Tuazon-McCheyne says the LGBTI community must celebrate their achievements and diversity but constantly strive to champion the causes of those who suffer. 
Were all the same in the sense that weve all faced the same marginalisation, he says. 
In his emotional speech to the Senate in the marriage debate the then attorney general, George Brandis, said passage of the bill will demolish the last significant bastion of legal discrimination against people on the grounds of their sexuality. 
While the list of demands to achieve queer equality is still long, Brandis is correct that the instances of discrimination before the law of gay and lesbian people are now few. 
Whether and how gay and lesbian Australians respond to calls for solidarity from the rest of the queer community could be the difference in whether LGBTI progress ends at the first two letters. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
"
"41""A women has been appointed as the bishop of London, the third position in the Church of England, in a move that delighted campaigners for gender equality but is likely to dismay conservatives in the church. Sarah Mullally, the bishop of Crediton, has been appointed the 133rd bishop of London, Downing Street announced. She will automatically take a seat in the House of Lords and the post-holder is traditionally dean of the royal chapels.  At a press conference at St Pauls Cathedral, Mullally said she was delighted and slightly terrified at her appointment. She was careful to reach out across theological divisions within the church in her first comments after the announcement, and said she wanted to serve people of faith and no faith. Before becoming a priest, she worked as a nurse in NHS hospitals in the capital, including St Thomas and the Royal Marsden, and became chief nursing officer in 1999. She was ordained as a priest in 2001 and made a dame in recognition of her services to nursing in 2005. It is a great honour to be nominated to the see of London. Having lived and worked in London for over 32 years, the thought of returning here is about returning home, she said. I am often asked what it has been like to have had two careers, first in the NHS and now in the church. I prefer to think that I have always had one vocation: to follow Jesus Christ, to know him and to make him known, always seeking to live with compassion in the service of others, whether as a nurse, a priest, or a bishop.  To be given the opportunity to do that now in this vibrant world city is a wonderful privilege. London is one of the few areas in which C of E congregations are growing, but it is a complex diocese with a formidable presence of conservatives, both from the Anglo-Catholic and evangelical traditions, who disapprove of women priests. Mullally told reporters: I respect those that cannot accept my ministry as a bishop because I am a women.  She said the diocese was theologically diverse, and she would work with the bishops of Fulham and Maidstone, who minister to clergy and congregations who do not accept female priests.      The last bishop of London, Richard Chartres, declined to ordain priests of either gender. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian    The previous bishop of London, Richard Chartres, declined to ordain priests of either gender in order to avoid stirring controversy. Mullally became the first female bishop to lead an ordination service two years ago, when she ordained four clergy, three of whom were women. Watch, which campaigns for gender equality in the church, said it was immensely delighted at the appointment. London was one of the lowest performing dioceses in terms of women in ministry and senior leadership roles, it pointed out. But Tony Robinson, bishop of Wakefield and chairman of Forward in Faith which does not accept women ordination, said Mullallys appointment in a diocese where so many people rejected the ministry of women would result in a deeper impairment of communion. Mullally is viewed as supportive of LGBT equality. The new bishop said London was a very diverse city and that she hoped everyone could find a spiritual home. She did, however, endorse current C of E teaching that marriage was a union between a man and women, saying: I absolutely support that. William Taylor, the rector of St Helens Bishopsgate, one of Londons largest churches, threatened to break from the C of E earlier this month if the next bishop of London had liberal views on sexuality. The church tweeted its congratulations to Mullally on Monday, and said it looked forward to working with her on mutual flourishing. Jayne Ozanne, a leading LGBT campaigner in the church, said she was absolutely delighted with this extraordinarily brave, courageous and well-deserved appointment. She added: Her appointment will ensure that the church takes seriously its commitment to learning from medicine and science, particularly in the areas of human sexuality and gender, where we have often been so ignorant. Mullally said the church needed more black and minority ethnic clergy and better representation of disabled people, as well as women, in order to better represent the communities it served.   Related: Former archbishop of Canterbury lashes out at Justin Welby in letter    She spoke of deprivation and inequality in London, where some people felt marginalised, voiceless and angry. Such emotions had been evident at last weeks memorial service for Grenfell Tower, she said, and many urgent issues remained unresolved. On safeguarding within the church, she said she would seek to have a culture  where there is no place for abuse, and planned to work with survivors and help them flourish. Gilo, a survivor whose surname is withheld at his request, and who has campaigned for independent oversight of safeguarding within the church, said: I think survivors will hope this represents a long overdue turning point.  As third most senior bishop, Dame Sarah Mullally can now take a far more decisive role in championing a compassionate and just response with real structural reformation at last. I hope she invites survivors, men and women, to her enthronement  not as protesters but as presences of the need for authentic justice and healing for all survivors.  "
"42""A senior Church of England bishop has lambasted conservative evangelical Christians in the US for their uncritical support of Donald Trump, urging them to reflect on how their endorsement of the president relates to their faith. Paul Bayes, the bishop of Liverpool, said self-styled evangelicals risked bringing the word evangelical into disrepute, and added there was no justification for Christians contradicting Gods teaching to protect the poor and the weak. Bayes told the Guardian: Some of the things that have been said by religious leaders seem to collude with a system that marginalises the poor, a system which builds walls instead of bridges, a system which says people on the margins of society should be excluded, a system which says were not welcoming people any more into our country.     Paul Bayes: If people want to support rightwing populism  how are they going to relate that to their Christian faith? Photograph: Rebecca Lupton for the Guardian    Whenever people say those kinds of things, they need to be able to justify that theyre saying those things as Christians, and I do not believe its justifiable. He said he regretted that people who call themselves evangelical in the US seem to be uncritically accepting positions taken by Trump and his allies. Some quite significant so-called evangelical leaders are uncritically supporting people in ways that imply they are colluding or playing down the seriousness of things which in other parts of their lives [they] would see as really important, Bayes added. He stressed that not all evangelicals were Trump supporters, saying there were many, many Christians who are trying to proclaim the gospel as weve received it, even if that means political leaders have to be challenged. Last month, Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, said he could not comprehend the strength of support for Trump among conservative evangelicals in the US. I really genuinely do not understand where that is coming from, he told ITVs Peston on Sunday programme. In his Christmas Day sermon at Canterbury Cathedral, Welby criticised populist leaders that deceive their people, in comments interpreted as being aimed at Trump.   Related: Archbishop of Canterbury denounces 'populist leaders that deceive'    According to the Washington-based Pew Research Center, 80% of self-identified white evangelical Christians said they voted for Trump in the 2016 election, and three-quarters have since said they approve of his presidency. Bayes, who has been bishop of Liverpool since 2014, said: If people want to support rightwing populism anywhere in the world, they are free to do so. The question is, how are they going to relate that to their Christian faith? And if what I believe are the clear teachings of the gospel about love for all, the desire for justice and for making sure marginalised and defenceless people are protected, if it looks as though those teachings are being contradicted, then I think there is a need to say so. Bayes was speaking to mark the launch of a new Christian charity, which he is chairing, aimed at eliminating discrimination based on sexuality or gender. The Ozanne Foundation will work with religious organisations around the world on LGBTI, gender and sexuality issues, as well as conflict resolution and education. It will be led by Jayne Ozanne, a prominent campaigner for equality within the C of E. Along with Bayes, the charitys trustees and advisers include David Ison, the dean of St Pauls Cathedral, Jeffrey John, the dean of St Albans, and Martyn Percy, the dean of Christ Church, Oxford.   Related: Bishop attacks 'sense of entitlement' among rich and powerful    Bayes has previously called for far-reaching change in C of E attitudes to LGBTI people, saying he had been profoundly changed by encounters with lesbian and gay Christians, including within his own family. I have come to believe that we need to change the church, he said last year. The Ozanne Foundation would provide strong and clear advocacy, not only for LGBTI inclusion, but against other forms of discrimination and hurt in the church, he said. There is room in the church for people who strongly and clearly advocate for change, and I want to support them. The churchs institutional inertia needed to be countered, Bayes added. There is no doubt that the church at the moment is on a journey, and that journey needs to arrive at a place of inclusion further on than we are at the moment. What matters to me in terms of my own responsibility and my own advocacy is that we dont settle for second best, that we keep trying to move the organisation forward."
"43""Anita Hill, who sparked a nascent national reckoning with sexual harassment when she testified during Clarence Thomass supreme court confirmation hearings in 1991, has been chosen to lead a commission on sexual misconduct organized and financed by some of the most prominent figures in Hollywood.   Related: Minnie Driver: men like Matt Damon 'simply cannot understand what abuse is like'    The Commission on Sexual Harassment and Advancing Equality in the Workplace will be charged with tackling the broad culture of abuse and power disparity in media and entertainment, a statement from its organisers said. The commission will lead the entertainment industry toward alignment in achieving safer, fairer, more equitable and accountable workplaces  particularly for women and marginalized people. Commission organisers some of the most powerful women in the film industry, including Kathleen Kennedy, president of Lucasfilm; Freada Kapor Klein, a venture capitalist and longtime advocate for sexual harassment victims; Nina Shaw, a Hollywood lawyer; and Maria Eitel, who co-chairs the Nike Foundation. A meeting called on Friday attracted executives including Disneys Bob Iger, Jim Gianopulos and Karen Stuart of Paramount, Netflixs Ted Sarandos and Les Moonves of CBS. The agent Ari Emanuel, Screen Actors Guild president Gabrielle Carteris, and Dawn Hudson, CEO of the Academy of Motion Pictures, also attended. Several major unions, guilds, and agencies have signed on to work with the commission, which will meet to decide its mission and scope at the beginning of 2018. The commission will not seek just one solution but a comprehensive strategy to address the complex and interrelated causes of the problems of parity and power, said Kennedy. The selection of Hill speaks to how sharply the culture has shifted around the topic of sexual misconduct in the workplace. Hill, who is now a professor of law and social policy at Brandeis University, found herself in the national spotlight in 1991, around her gruelling testimony before a US Senate committee. Thomas had been Hills boss at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. She claimed he sexually harassed her but her questioning by the all-male committee was skeptical and derisive. Her testimony became a flashpoint for some of the first national conversations around the gender politics of the workplace. The next year saw a surge of sexual harassment complaints and women running for political office. In a recent interview with Teen Vogue, former senator and vice-president Joe Biden, who led the inquisition og Hill, said he wished he had been able to do more for her. He added: I owe her an apology. In one of several addresses she made to entertainment leaders in the past week, Hill said she never believed 1991 was the end, and I was going to make sure in my life that I never saw that as the defining moment for me or for this issue. The role that Hollywoods biggest power brokers should play in the ongoing reckoning has been the subject of much debate, since the first revelations about producer Harvey Weinstein. In an interview with Oprah Winfrey, the actor Jennifer Lawrence said the industrys highest echelon had an obligation to help protect the industrys least powerful. How can there be rules in place where there are certain ways that you just cannot treat people? she said. If every A-list actor decides to join this commission, we know everybody in the industry. The announcement of the commission on Friday night drew wide praise. BEYOND ME TOO: A HISTORIC STEP, wrote Jane Fonda in a representative tweet.   Related: Democrat Doug Jones: Trump shouldn't resign over sexual misconduct claims    Others, though, such as Lexi Alexander, a director and frequent advocate for women and minorities to receive more opportunities in entertainment, viewed the commission as an empty gesture. Lets create a commission with a bunch of agents who have enabled sexual harassment for years, she wrote. Every agent knew, Alexander wrote in another tweet, apparently referencing the dozens of Hollywood agents who were reportedly aware of Weinsteins behavior. Everyone of them. Any commission created with a bunch of heavyweight agents is BS. Even if Anita Hill is part of it. This is Hollywood at its best: creating an illusion. Journalists should know better. Most of the studios supporting and financing the commission have been exposed as places where sexism and harassment have run rampant. Since the first stories about Weinstein, accusations of sexual harassment or assault have toppled dozens of other power players and revealed a broad culture of complicity and enabling. Its a culture Hill is eager to dismantle. It is time to end the culture of silence, she said. Ive been at this work for 26 years. This moment presents us with an unprecedented opportunity to make real change."
"44""Art: Stefan KalmarAN AGE OF CRISIS: WHAT A GREAT OPPORTUNITY 2018 is all about reclaiming reality, opposing governmental and corporate paradoxes, and dissecting lies, before they become a new truth, the new normal  a new reality. A moment of crisis is also the moment in which new movements come into focus and new ideas are formed. Im excited by Forensic Architecture, an interdisciplinary group based at Goldsmiths College in London, which includes artists, journalists, architects, film-makers, lawyers, data analysts and activists. Forensic Architecture is the name of the research group as well as an investigative practice that crosses fields. It is grounded in the use of architecture as an optical device, employing forms of spatial analysis, mapping and reconstruction, overlaid with witness testimony and visual documentation. The group has undertaken a series of investigations into human rights violations and acts of state and corporate violence that have informed military, parliamentary and UN inquiries. At the same time, Metahaven, a Dutch design studio, deals with information democracy and corporate identity. Its most recent work, The Sprawl, considered the ways in which fantasy can be designed so as to seem or feel like a truth  how propaganda multiplies within that upload/download architecture; an architecture in which both fact and fiction can exist side by side and even overlap. These groups are, in many ways, the contemporary version of the Independent Group, a collection of radical young artists, writers and critics who in the 1950s called the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA) their home. And if the groups look similar, then this is because the struggles are too. Stefan Kalmr, a former Turner prize judge, is the director of the Institute of Contemporary Arts  Politics: Ed Miliband EMBRACE THE IDEALISM OF THE YOUNG   s travel ban\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  As has been proved in previous generations, young peoples vision can lead to long-term change. Photograph: Victoria Jones/PA    A major reason to be cheerful in politics in 2018, and for years to come, is young people. Amid the gloom that has hung over politics and society since Brexit and Trump, young people have represented the most noticeable countervailing force. We saw it this year at the general election, and we have seen it in the waves of young people engaged in the anti-Trump movement, the #MeToo campaign and much else. The significance lies not just in another set of people demanding progressive things, but a set of people with a new set of demands, unencumbered by the past and driven by the circumstances of today. People born after the fall of the Berlin Wall, for many of whom LGBT+ rights, a new wave of feminism, the fight against climate change and an openness to radicalism are part of their generational DNA. When they look at the mess previous generations have made, they are driven to this desire for something better. Our deeply unequal world, including inequality between generations, is turbocharging this movement, which is not scared to demand big change. Their idealism will often be dismissed as naivety or worse, as every wave is always dismissed, including the 1960s wave of feminism and anti-war sentiment. But older generations should resist the we know better impulse, the tendency to being a centrist dad as the term goes. Of course, this idealism is not always right, but its spirit is essential, and the demand it embodies for a new, fairer, more equal society should be embraced. Pessimism and cynicism achieve nothing. By contrast, the energy and vitality of this new generation can help defeat Trump and lead us to build a post-Brexit Britain that doesnt float off into a low-wage, offshore tax haven. Just as the causes of earlier generations of young people, once dismissed as outlandish and radical, eventually became mainstream, so too it can happen again. They are the best hope for the transformation of the country we are to the country we can become. Ed Miliband MP is a former leader of the Labour party and co-presenter of the Reasons to be Cheerful podcast Biology: Jim Smith INDIVIDUAL GENE SEQUENCING WILL TRANSFORM HEALTH     2018 will see advances in DNA sequencing thanks to samples from UK Biobank volunteers. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty    What we are is determined by our genes and by the sequence of the four chemicals  nucleotides  that make up the strands of our DNA. Fifteen years ago scientists sequenced and mapped the DNA in the human genome: they determined the order of the three billion nucleotides that make up our genetic material and they established (roughly) what the different parts of the genome do. That has been extraordinarily powerful in helping us understand how life works and what it is to be human. But to say we have sequenced the human genome is misleading. Our genomes are all different, and if we are to understand susceptibilities to disease, or how people will respond to certain treatments, we need to correlate the health of individual people with their individual DNA sequences. 2018 should see this begin to happen. Thanks to advances in DNA sequencing technologies, and contributions from private sources, government and charities, it is now feasible to read the precise DNA sequence in every volunteer recruited to UK Biobank. Set up 10 years ago, UK Biobank represents a cohort of half a million people between 40 and 69, all of whom contribute information about diet, activity, body measurements and other personal information, as well as samples of blood, urine and saliva. Participants have agreed to have their health monitored, and approved researchers from academia and industry have access to all the anonymised data. Already UK Biobank has transformed our understanding of health and disease, improving diagnosis and care for those with cancer and rare diseases. But if every participant has their genome sequenced, the prospects for understanding and treating disease, including obesity and mental health disorders, will be extraordinary. We do not know what we will find, but we can be confident it will transform our understanding of what it is to be healthy and what it is to be sick. Dr Jim Smith is a developmental biologist and the director of science at Wellcome, the science and health foundation Infrastructure: Sadie Morgan TIME TO BUILD PRIDE IN OUR ROADS AND RAILWAYS     The Ouse Valley viaduct in Sussex is a striking example of Britains built heritage. But how many of us notice the countrys infrastructure? Photograph: Alamy    Our built environment is so integral to our lives that most of us rarely think about it  we take it for granted. We can say the same about the design of our infrastructure and how it affects people and place. It rarely gets the attention it deserves. As architects and designers our focus has been on buildings at the expense of everything else. We can all think of our favourite building, but can you name a great streetscape, road junction or railway viaduct? Thats because often what defines the infrastructure of our countryside and cities is the miles of security fences, concrete noise barriers and railway stanchions. Reimagining our built environment is one of the greatest opportunities we have to put a healthier, more compassionate and greener philosophy into place. From stations to bridges, roads to railways, electricity pylons to flood defences,our infrastructure should engender national pride and a sense of local ownership. Look to the past, and there are plenty of great examples from Brunels bridges to Bazalgettes sewers and pumping stations to power stations reimagined for the 21st century, as in Battersea and Bankside, now Tate Modern. The UK consistently nurtures some of the best engineering, technical and architectural minds in the world, but we are building it elsewhere. The good news is that big projects such as HS2  the largest infrastructure project in the UK for a decade  has committed to high-quality design from the outset. Britain has proved it is capable of designing and building world-class infrastructure. Add that to a commitment to invest hundreds of billions over the next decade, and this is an exciting prospect. I see 2018 as the year Britain rediscovers its infrastructure mojo. Sadie Morgan is the co-founder of dRMM, which won the Riba Stirling Prize in 2017 and a member of the National Infrastructure Commission Food: Jay Rayner AS PRICES RISE, RESTAURANTS AND FARMS WILL STRUGGLE     Increasing difficulties in recruiting agricultural labour, partly as a result of the weakened pound, are likely to be felt by the food industry during 2018. Photograph: Alamy     Of all the falsehoods peddled by the pro-Brexit lobby, the most egregious was the notion that it was a decision for our future; the impact of the decision to leave the European Union on our food chain was instant, with the devaluation of sterling leading to an acceleration in food price inflation. By November this year it was running at 4.2%, a third higher than the headline rate. In 2018 it is only going to get worse: the price of food will continue to rise ahead of general inflation, and as a weakened pound makes exporting ever more attractive, the major retailers will find themselves locked in competition with international markets for produce. Expect to see the big four supermarkets  Sainsburys, Tesco, Asda and Morrisons  softening up their customers for higher prices. Meanwhile, the discounters, especially Aldi and Lidl, which keep prices low by restricting choice but buying in enormous volume, will flourish. The optimistic view is that this should all be good for food producers in 2018. In reality, Britains farmers have rarely benefited from competition among retailers, which have always prioritised shareholders over suppliers. Whats more, farmers have their own price issues. Few food items are the result of a solely domestic supply chain. They depend on inputs  seedlings for fruit growing, for example, or animal feeds  from abroad and the prices of those have also risen. More pressing are the accelerating labour issues. British agriculture depends on migrant labour, and there is increasing evidence of a reluctance to come to work here, both because the wages are worth less when sent home, and a growing perception that Britain is a less welcoming place for workers from abroad. This is all going to be felt most keenly in the restaurant sector, which is preparing itself for a brutal 2018. Those ingredient price rises, combined with increased business rates, a shortage of vital staff from abroad and a general softening in consumer confidence, are expected to result in many restaurants going bust. For Britains food industry the next 12 months are not expected to be kind. Jay Rayner is Observer restaurant critic Space: Maggie Aderin-Pocock GRAVITATIONAL WAVES WILL CHANGE ASTRONOMY     Advances in the understanding of space can be traced back to Einstein and other pioneers. Photograph: A. Simonnet/AFP/Getty Images    We all know Einstein was a pretty smart chap, but few things show how ahead of his time he was as the recent detection of gravitational waves, which came out of his theory of general relativity, and is now transforming the way we look into space. In this theory, Einstein merged three-dimensional space and time into a four-dimensional continuum called spacetime. Within it, mass causes distortions in spacetime and this manifests itself as gravity (you may have seen this shown as a distortion of a rubber sheet). A gravitational wave is formed when two or more super massive objects collide, resulting in ripples in spacetime that, like ripples on a pond, expand outwards into space. Einstein published his theory in 1916, but it would take another hundred years, until 2016, for the first confirmed detection of a gravitational wave. Why did it take so long? The challenge was that these ripples are minuscule. The measurement needed is the equivalent of detecting a movement of 1mm over the distance between us and Alpha Centauri (our neighbouring star about 25 trillion miles away). It sounds impossible, but the gravitational wave has a very distinct signature that can now be detected. The joy of this is that it gives us a whole new way of doing astronomy. For thousands of years observations with the eye, telescopes, photographic plates and digital detectors all relied on detecting electromagnetic waves  one of the few things that can travel through the vacuum of space. Ligo (Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory) can now make these challenging detections and is now fully operational after a big refurbishment. And with five confirmed gravitational wave detections in the past 18 months, we are gaining momentum  many more exotic collisions should be detected in 2018. A whole new field of astronomy is being established, and it all stems from Einsteins genius. Maggie Aderin-Pocock is a space scientist and honorary research associate in University College Londons department of physics and astronomy Equality: Sophie WalkerWOMEN MUST BE AT THE HEART OF A FAIRER FUTURE     100 years after women won the right to vote in Britain, the battle for equality is being waged worldwide. Photograph: ZUMA Wire/Rex    Politicians could make 2018 the year that women matter, not by talking about equality but by creating it. Not by telling women to try harder  (All you need to lift centuries of oppression is to ask better for that pay rise and stop making lifestyle decisions about babies)  but by understanding the structural inequalities holding women back. By remaking our economy, our society and our institutions. That would mean understanding that harassment is caused by a power imbalance and is not the result of occasional deviant behaviour; that austerity and welfare cuts damage women because they are designed to; that unaffordable childcare hurts national productivity; that we all get less from gender-blind spending choices. We could all share care if paternity leave was funded and extended. We would all value it if we saw the benefits of investment in it: care yields twice the economic benefit of investing in construction. The next generation could thrive on relationships based on consent and respect if we taught equality in classrooms. And ending competitive tendering of women services could give the specialists who understand how to end violence against women and girls sustainable grant funding to do that work. We could create a fairer future. If Brexit is the process of remaking our relationship with the world, women must be at the negotiating table. If Brexit is the result of our qualms about immigration, we must build a new system that gives women equal chances to build new lives, with access to public funds. If Brexit is opportunities for all, then women jobs and rights must be protected and extended as part of trade talks. 2018 marks the centenary of a small group of white, wealthy women winning the right to vote. It should also mark the year when all women, in all their glorious diversity, could finally vote for their equality. Sophie Walker is a former journalist and the leader of the women Equality party Books: Jonny GellerWELL WANT REAL PEOPLE AND NUANCED STORIES     Books will offer both an escape from reality and insights into the way the world of 2018 works. Photograph: Jorg Greuel/Getty Images    We have seen a shift in the nonfiction market to authentic voices such as memoirs of doctors (Adam Kays bestseller, This is Going to Hurt), nurses (Language of Kindness by Christie Watson, to be published in May), shepherds (James Rebankss No1 bestseller The Shepherds Life) and surgeons (Henry Marsh, Paul Kalanithi). I suspect this trend of real people writing about real experiences will continue. But it is fiction that gives voice to our greatest fears and the political upheavals of 2017 have proved a great distraction to the necessary occupation of reading fiction. I can see sweeping love stories that take us away from the Twitter rages of world leaders (Ruth Jones of Gavin and Stacey fame and Jojo Moyes have new books out early in 2018), complex thrillers that take us closer to how the world works (McMafia on BBC1 from 1 January is taken from Misha Glennys book on the links between international crime and business), and fantastical stories to transport us (Harvills big debut, The Mermaid &amp; Mrs Hancock by Imogen Hermes Gowar). Added to this, the Weinstein earthquake and its inability to swallow Trump will result in a new narrative conversation. In the 80s and 90s, movies such as Fatal Attraction, Basic Instinct and Disclosure emerged from Hollywoods sense of a perceived threat posed by a new working female population, and I suspect Hollywood will find a way to give voice to the #MeToo movement. I also believe one response to populism will be detailed and specific stories of human struggle, filled with nuance, complexity and ambiguity. Most of all, the huge diversity of voices in Britain that have been waiting to be heard will find a place in the mainstream, and as we move away from continental Europe politically and economically, we will find expression in the bigger questions and multifarious voices in this country. Jonny Geller is a writer, book agent and joint chief executive of Curtis Brown"
"45""For the leaders of this years feminist protests, 2017 has been marked by moments of clear progress and painful revelations. A year that started with the march on Washington DC protesting about Donald Trumps election win ended with the period of reckoning over sexual assault and workplace harassment. And along the line there has been a national dialogue around issues of sexism, gender equality and sexual harassment.  Were in a hell of a fight  probably, for most of us, the fight of our lives  but we are seeing victories. We are seeing progress, said Tamika Mallory, co-president of the women March. On 21 January, the day after Donald Trump took office, women gathered on the National Mall in Washington and in cities across the country and around the world to deliver a roaring rejoinder to his presidency.   Related: Make 'feminism' the word of the year until women feel safe    Trump has denied accusations by more than a dozen women of sexual misconduct, and won office over Hillary Clinton, a women with decades of political experience. We saw a confluence of blatant misogyny and sexism on the national stage in this campaign for the presidency, said Bob Bland, a co-founder of the women March. Not that we dont all see it in our lives every day constantly but to see it on such a big scale, pounded into our faces for 18 months, was something that really permeated the American psyche in a way that primed us for what happened next. Tarana Burke, the founder of the #MeToo movement, said the march had set the tone for the year. And when the New York Times and the New Yorker published allegations against the Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein, a door was opened for thousands of women to come forward and share accounts of sexual violence and harassment in various industries.     Tarana Burke, founder of the #MeToo movement. Photograph: Paul Sancya/AP    This is the tip of the iceberg, said Burke, a longtime activist who started the #MeToo movement in 2006 to help survivors of sexual violence. Ive been saying: this is a movement, not just a moment. Were still watching it grow. Burke was featured as one of Time Magazines people of the year, a group of women it named the silence breakers for their role in starting a global dialogue.  Yet she says the conversation is still too exclusive and must expand to include the experiences of marginalized women.  In some regards, when some women are successful we are all successful but in other regards it doesnt always trickle down to all of us, she said. So I dont know that women of color will say that for them, this year has been as powerful. All the leaders agree that women of color are underrepresented and are working from within their movements to change that. Mallory said 2017 offered some signs that voters were open to a changing of the guard. As examples, she pointed to the election to the Virginia house of delegates of Danica Roem, who became one of the countrys first openly transgender state lawmakers; the election of Keisha Lance Bottoms, a black women, as mayor of Atlanta; and the defeat in the Alabama Senate race of Roy Moore, who faced accusations of sexual assault and child molestation. Moore denies wrongdoing.        video\"            data-video-provider=\"Reuters/AP\"            >    Voices from the women March on Washington    The women March has also been credited with helping to inspire more women to run for office. Emilys List, an organization that supports pro-choice women running for office, said 25,000 women contacted the group about running for office in 2017, more than 25 times the number of women it heard from during the 2016 election cycle. We always wanted to see that collective power on the streets be converted into political power, Mallory said.    Related: Reckoning with a culture of male resentment    The 2018 congressional midterms are the next major test of the so-called resistances political power. On the anniversary of the women March, organizers will launch Power to the Polls, a national voter registration and mobilization campaign targeting swing states. This year of the women will end, perhaps fittingly, with Burke literally ringing in the new year. On 31 December, she will press the Waterford crystal button that starts the ball drop in New Yorks Times Square. I predict that were going to see some dramatic changes in 2018, she said. And that will be because of this momentum that weve built up in 2017.  Sign up for weekly news updates about the protests and activism in the US     Sign up for the Resistance Now newsletter "
"46""Government funding should be available only to film and TV companies that adhere to a code of practice on sexual harassment, Screen Australia has said. The peak film and TV body announced the development of the code as industry professionals convened in Sydney to address systemic sexual harassment and abuse in the Australian screen industry. The forum was also positioned as a local response to the #metoo movement that has swept across the world after allegations of systemic sexual harassment and assault were levelled against film producer Harvey Weinstein.   Related: It's an important moment for women but will #metoo create lasting change? | Rebecca Huntley    Participants in the forum, spearheaded by Women in Film and Television NSW, told story after story of coming up against social and structural roadblocks in addressing sexual harassment, and expressed concerns about the difficulty of widespread, long-term cultural change. Audience members recounted losing work, education opportunities and their livelihoods after making complaints of sexual harassment, particularly against people in a position of power. Announcing the code in her opening address, the chief operating officer of Screen Australia, Fiona Cameron, reflected on the devastating past two months of revelations. The code would set out the rights and responsibilities of employees and employers, and would be widely available in a format that could be easily read, understood and put into practice, Cameron said. She said she hoped government funding for screen projects would eventually be available only to those workplaces that proactively dealt with discrimination, harassment and abuse.  Power, influence and bad behaviour unchecked all result in the culture we now stare down, she said. The culture of the alpha male, the protected alpha male, who is revered on the big and small screen and behind the screen and whose actions are beyond reproach, beyond repudiation and beyond badly behaved  for people in the know, this is how it has been forever ... We have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to make a difference. The director of the For Films Sake festival, Sophie Mathisen, said she felt there was frustration about the panellists focus on the need for change from the top.  I think this is crucial, but incredibly difficult to enact in the screen industries as its industrially segregated with many different tops, Mathisen told Guardian Australia. We need to understand how these behaviours have been perpetrated over many decades. She said the discussion in the forum of the National Rugby League as an example of an industry that had facilitated positive change towards women in response to sexual harassment cases was problematic because in that case there had been a lack of female input. Such an example highlights the industrial root to the cultural problem of sexual harassment. As with the NRL, the problem is with teams of men setting the cultural parameters for their own behaviour without female input. What we know is that the film industry does in fact exist much like football  teams of men working almost exclusively with other men, and therein lies the issue. How do you encourage gender equity? Panellists devoted much time to clarifying the rights of victims of sexual harassment under the law, both at work and in work-adjacent contexts, such as auditions and industry pitch sessions.  The sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, addressed the forum via videolink, acknowledging the negative career impacts that victims of sexual harassment face if they speak up about their experiences. This pressure often came from internal hierarchies, she said. You dont need to be Harvey Weinstein to slow someones career, you just need to be a manager, Jenkins said. The Human Rights Commission would be collecting data on sexual harassment in workplaces, the forum heard.  Discussions also took in the broader context of bullying in the workplace. Zoe Angus from the Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance said 62% of actors and technicians working in Australian performing arts had experienced bullying, and comparable numbers had witnessed it. More robust structures were needed around harassment and consent that did not focus only on performing artists in particular circumstances, Angus said. Consent and boundaries needs to be part of the conversation at the beginning, not just related to sex scenes and nudity but rather the full gamut of physical behaviour."
"47""Thousands of women have turned out for the global women March in London despite the heavy rain and sleet, one year after millions marched in seven continents. 
Across the road from Downing Street and stretching back past the memorial to women in the second world war, protesters chanted Times up and We want justice not revenge on Sunday. 
 
  Related: The best signs from the Women's March in London  in pictures  
 
Organised by women March London, whose protest a year ago shut down central London, it was named the Times Up rally in honour of the campaign launched in January by women in Hollywood to counter sexual harassment in the entertainment business and workplaces following the Weinstein scandal and #MeToo movement.  
There were speeches from women rights activists Helen Pankhurst  great-granddaughter of Emmeline Pankhurst  and the journalist and author Reni Eddo-Lodge. 
The Labour MP Stella Creasy gave one of the most fiery speeches. Calling the houses of Westminster Hogwarts gone wrong, she called for more women to run for office.  
Creasy said: A year ago, everyone told us this was a flash in the pan. They said women will march and then theyll go home and nothing will change. Thats the point. Everything has to change because #MeToo isnt just some hashtag, its saying were not going to cope any more, were going to change the rules.  
She said gender parity in parliament and local councils was crucial, adding: We have so much further to go.  
 
  Related: BBC pay row: female stars demand urgent action to 'rectify injustices'  
 
She announced that a Times Up fund would be set up in the UK, similar to that launched in Hollywood, so women could have access to money to fight legal costs.  
There were women and men of all ages and backgrounds in the audience.  
Bea Miller, holding a sign that read I rebel therefore we exist, said: Ive been fighting for equality for women for as long as I can remember and feel like the time is now for women to finally smash the patriarchal system that keeps us all  men and women  oppressed. 
She added: I think its fantastic that so many people have come out in this awful weather and were just saying no more. 
A group of 13- and 14-year-olds were also in attendance. One of them, Yuri Watanabe, said: Women are being oppressed everywhere, even in places you wouldnt even imagine. We came here to represent.  
Her friend, Zara Khan, said: When you go to work it should be a professional environment and you shouldnt be abused. So many women cant say anything because of the power over them. Its important to raise awareness and show support as women.  
 
  
  
  People of all ages attended the rally. 
  Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
  
 
Towards the end it began to snow and the words on many handmade signs were running. One protester held a placard showing support for transgender women. Marie Dalle said: A lot of my friends are trans women and I see how they suffer each day. There is a problem in the feminist movement and we need to accept they are women and take into account their experiences.  
Holding the sign up, she said: I made this because I want to help trans women be heard here. 
Nearby, Tsedenia Skitch, a volunteer with Equality Now, said she had come in spite of the bad weather because she felt like people were finally listening. She said: My sign is completely disintegrating, but I wanted to stand in solidarity with everyone and fight for women rights. Its really in the public consciousness at the moment because of #MeToo and the campaign at the Golden Globes.  
Emma McNally, one of the core organisers of both marches, said Sundays rally went brilliantly.  
Were so pleased to see everyone out in great numbers on a day when the weather is absolutely atrocious, but that just says it all. Time is up. People are sick of it. Were constantly being sold there is no alternative, but were not having it any more. 
She believes people will look back on this as a historic moment. So much has happened in the last year. Its been a very powerful year. The conversation has been opened up and things are being talked about in the mainstream that wouldnt have been a few years ago. Its also a powerful moment for feminism, which is becoming intersectional, which is exactly how it should be and the speakers we had are on the frontline of that."
"48""The national assembly for Wales has been named Britains best employer for LGBT staff in Stonewalls annual list of top 100 LGBT-inclusive employers. The list drawn up by Britains leading charity for LGBT equality included the law firm Pinsent Masons, the housing association Gentoo, Lloyds Banking Group and Newcastle city council. The Welsh assembly, which came in fifth last year, was praised for having a range of policies for lesbian, gay and bisexual staff and for introducing measures to improve the workplace for transgender employees. These included updating their workplace systems to offer an Mx title as well as a space for staff to give their own gender term on forms. The assembly has also introduced gender-neutral facilities. Ruth Hunt, Stonewalls chief executive, said: At a time when LGBT people are subject to profound discrimination and abuse, both in and out of the workplace, our LGBT-inclusive employers are a welcome beacon of hope that a positive future is possible. The national assembly for Wales is a trailblazer for equality, especially for trans equality, and wed like other organisations to look at the straightforward, positive actions they have taken and follow the example they have set. She said creating an accepting work environment made good business sense. When staff feel comfortable, happy and understood, they will, of course, perform much better than if theyre having to hide who they are, or if theyre scared to go to work for fear of abuse. The assembly member Elin Jones said: The national assembly has diversity and inclusion at the very heart of its role representing the people of Wales. We are proud to support our LGBT staff network and continue to work to create an inclusive culture  not only for the people who work here but for the people we represent across all Waless diverse communities. For the first time Stonewalls annual review marked employers specifically on trans inclusivity. More than 430 employers were in contention for a spot. The top 10 employers were a diverse mix of organisations, with both public and private sector representation.  Media and manufacturing firms made the list for the first time in recent years, with Sky coming in at 29, and GSK at 21. Stonewall collected more than 92,000 anonymous responses from employees on their experience of workplace culture and diversity, making it one of Britains largest national employment surveys.  Earlier this month the group released research that showed half of trans people (51%) have hidden their identity at work for fear of discrimination or abuse, and that one in eight trans employees (12%) have been physically attacked by colleagues or customers in the past year. Top 10 LGBT-inclusive employers:   National assembly for Wales   Pinsent Masons   Gentoo   Cheshire fire and rescue service  Lloyds Banking Group   Baker McKenzie   Berwin Leighton Paisner   Citi   Newcastle city council   Victim Support    Top trans-inclusive employers (unranked):   Baker McKenzie   Berwin Leighton Paisner   Cardiff University   Gentoo   Lloyds Banking Group   National assembly for Wales   Pinsent Masons  Swansea University   The University of Manchester   Victim Support   Your Homes Newcastle    This article was amended on 31 January 2018. The original version put Clifford Chance instead of Cheshire fire and rescue service at No 4 on the list. Clifford Chance was No 11. "
"49""A Muslim women in the southern Indian state of Kerala has received death threats after leading prayers for a mixed congregation in an act of defiance against established Islamic practice. Jamida Beevi is thought to be the first women to lead Friday prayers in India for both male and female worshippers, doing so at Wandoor Cherukod village in Malappuram last week. She also delivered a sermon on gender justice.   Related: More than 63 million women 'missing' in India, statistics show    I believe in the Quran and the Quran teaches equality between the sexes. All this discrimination against women is manmade, imposed by the male clergy and I want to change it, said Beevi, 34, speaking to the Guardian by phone on Tuesday.  Traditionally a male imam leads prayers, except when the congregation is all female.     Jamida Beevi leading the Friday prayers on Friday Photograph: TA Ameerudheen/Scroll.in    Beevi said she believed the Quran contains no injunction that says only men can lead prayers. She belongs to a small sect called the Quran Sunnat Society; it believes only in the Quran, not in the hadith  the statements made by the prophet on a variety of subjects and written down by his followers after his death. Most orthodox Muslims believe in both the Quran and the hadith. The Quran says all human beings are equal and anyone can lead prayers. The Quran is the basis of Islam, not the hadith, which were created by men after the prophets death. For 1,400 years, men have decided things, only men have made decisions. It is time for all that to change now, said Beevi, who is divorced and a mother of two children. She led the prayers not in a mosque, but in the office of the Quran Sunnat Society, where she works full time. Her act has provoked a backlash, with local media reporting that members of Muslim organisations have threatened to kill her. These are extremists who cannot tolerate any reform. I have had threats on WhatsApp, on YouTube, on Facebook, but I am not scared, she says. Abdul Rahman, the secretary of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind, which manages about 500 mosques in Kerala, said Beevis action was an arranged drama, and a gimmick to acquire cheap popularity while distracting the Muslim community from real issues. By tradition, men lead the prayers because women are busy in the household and have their limitations, said Rahman. This division of duties between men and women is not discrimination, its a question of what best suits men and what best suits women.   Related: Second women arrested in Tehran for hijab protest    Muslim women in India have recently been leading the charge in reforming ancient practices they believe are discriminatory. A recent victory was the August 2017 ruling by the Indian supreme court that struck down the practice of triple talaq, under which a Muslim husband could utter the word talaq three times in succession to instantly divorce his wife. The campaign to ban triple talaq was led by the women rights group, Bharatiya Muslim Mahila Andolan (BMMA). The BMMA has also been training Muslim women to become a kazi or Islamic judge, who adjudicates in marriage, polygamy, divorce and custody disputes. The job has always been held by men and is usually passed from father to son. Last July, in Jaipur, the first group of women to finish a two-year training course began to work as qualified kazis. Asked about Beevis actions, Nishat Hussain, the head of the BMMA in Jaipur, said: I support the idea of equality but in the Quran, it is said that a women can lead other women in prayers but cant lead men, and if she goes against these tenets of the faith, it will be hard for people to support her. Beevi said she planned to continue leading prayers: If need be I will ask for police protection but I will continue. How can India as country develop if we dont change all the things that are holding women back? "
"50""A former chief rabbi of the UK, Jonathan Sacks, has defended his role in a controversial speech delivered in Israel this week by the US vice-president, Mike Pence. Pence made a two-day visit to Israel, the highlight of which was a speech at the countrys parliament, the Knesset, in which he announced the date of moving the American embassy to Jerusalem. Arab-Israeli legislators were thrown out of the Knesset after heckling the vice-president. Dan Sacker, Lord Sackss spokesman, confirmed that the former chief rabbi and the vice-president had met in New York for 90 minutes to discuss the speech. The meeting was positive and productive, he said. Sacks, who was chief rabbi for 22 years until 2013, considered it a great tribute to the Jewish people that Pence had sought his guidance for sections of his speech dwelling on the historical connection between Jews and Israel, Sacker added. Pences speech featured religious and biblical references and highlighted the Jewish peoples connection to Israel, as well as announcing that the US embassy would move to Jerusalem by the end of 2019 and calling on Palestinians to take part in peace talks. Palestinians and many diplomats view Donald Trumps decision to move the embassy as pre-empting the outcome of negotiations and precluding the possibility of East Jerusalem being the capital of a future Palestinian state. The meeting centred around how best to frame elements of the speech  in particular the biblical and historical connection between the Jewish people and the land of Israel, and the American and Jewish stories, Sacker said in a statement. It was these, and only these, elements of the speech that Rabbi Sacks assisted with. He considered it a great tribute to the Jewish people that someone like Vice-President Pence would turn to a Jewish source for guidance on such matters. The former chief rabbi was not paid for his help with Pences speech, Sacker said. According to a White House official quoted by the Times of Israel, Pence sought out Sackss input and saw him as a hugely critical element in crafting the speech. Rabbi Sacks has advised prime ministers and presidents for years. The vice-president thought it was critical to have his counsel for a speech of this magnitude, the official said. Pence, an evangelical Christian, holds hardline positions on gender equality, gay rights and abortion. He has been accused of demanding that public funds for HIV/Aids be redirected to conversion therapy for LGBT people. Some evangelical Christians, known as Christian Zionists, believe that the return of Jews to Israel is a prerequisite for the second coming of Christ. In his speech, Pence said Americans were fierce advocates of the Jewish peoples aspiration to return to the land of your forefathers to claim your own new birth of freedom in your beloved homeland. He added: The people of the United States have always held a special affection and admiration for the people of the Book. Sacks, who holds the title emeritus chief rabbi, was made a life peer in 2009."
"51""Chiles president-elect, the billionaire businessman Sebastian Piera, has unveiled a new hardline cabinet, including prominent conservative figures and some politicians once closely aligned with the Pinochet dictatorship.  The new interior minister, Andrs Chadwick, was a vocal supporter of Augusto Pinochet during his 1973-1990 regime, which named him president of the Catholic University Students Federation.  Chadwick and the new justice minister, Hernn Larran, were also supporters and defenders of the secretive German enclave Colonia Dignidad, which was established by the fugitive Nazi officer and paedophile Paul Shfer in the early 60s. It later emerged that the enclave was used by security officials to torture and murder opponents of the regime. Both Chadwick and Larran later made statements distancing themselves from Pinochets regime. Pieras victory in Decembers runoff ended eight years of government by a centre-left coalition under Michelle Bachelet (two non-consecutive four-year terms), and marked the latest in a string of electoral gains for the right in Latin America.  Although Piera campaigned on a centrist platform, many analysts predicted that he would tack to the right upon election. On the night of the election, one group of Piera supporters celebrated by hoisting aloft a bust of Pinochet. The new ministerial lineup is dominated by men in their 60s. None of the most senior positions will go to women, who will head just seven out of the 23 ministries. Many of the newly nominated ministers had previously served in Pieras previous government, between 2010 and 2014.    Related: Sebastin Piera wins Chile's presidential election    Antoine Maillet, a political scientist at the University of Chile, said the new cabinet  which will take office on 11 March  clearly demonstrated an intention to turn back Bachelets progressive reforms.  They definitely want to change the course the country is taking, he told the Guardian.  A key part of Bachelets legacy was an effort to roll back Chiles draconian abortion laws, but the lineup of Pineras government suggests that too may soon be threatened. The new minister for women and gender equality, Isabel Pl, and the incoming health minister, Emilio Santelices, were both vocal opponents of a landmark ruling last year to legalise abortion under certain circumstances. The political commentator Claudio Fuentes said that most of the appointees were close allies of Piera. This isnt a government of innovation, he said. There are few new faces and no signs of a more liberal approach by Piera. Ideologically this is simply a very traditional and conservative, pro-business government.  Alfredo Moreno, a businessman and former foreign minister in Pieras previous government, will leave his post at one of Chiles leading business organisations to become minister of social development, an area in which he has no previous experience.  But hes very close to Piera, whos clearly marking him out as a future presidential candidate, said Fuentes."
"52""There is no doubt about the enormous contribution being made by clergy from the established church in responding to the challenges of poverty, isolation and cuts to public services in rural areas (How rural vicars became the last social workers in the countryside, News. However, it was disappointing that the article failed to mention the significant contribution being made, often in partnership with the C of E, by the nonconformist churches, in particular the Methodist church. Rural churches are especially good at responding to need by loving service and this is more often than not undertaken within the spirit of ecumenism. Rural churches are often at the core of the social fabric of villages and small towns. The C of E and the Methodist church signed an agreement to work together in 2003. This is known as the Anglican-Methodist Covenant and evidence of it being lived out can be found in many villages and rural communities. The C of E has much to offer. Churches together can offer even more. Rev Ruth FryWinchester When size does matter With reference to How Hitler could solve our housing crisis, New Review) concerning the objection people have against their road being called Bell End, as an 80-year-old, I was unfamiliar with this euphemism for the glans. At my age, I suppose one tends to take less interest in such things. As an amateur trombonist (of sorts) however, the expression has a different meaning. It being the flared end of the instrument from which the noise erupts. This is not to say the trombone has no sexy connections. I remember Terry Wogan disputing Ken Dodds assertion that love is like a violin, claiming that it is much more like a slide trombone. In the case of the bell end of the trombone, performance can be affected by size. Classical players tend to have larger ones to produce a deeper, more sonorous note, whereas those of us in the jazz and big band world have smaller ones to make a brighter sound. I would have thought the addition of road, way or avenue would have solved the good citizens problem.John DaviesBristol No calls for segregation  Kenan Malik, in his interesting piece on class and race (In British education, the central issue is class, not ethnicity, Comment) says that many prominent figures [including myself] called for black boys to be educated in separate schools. To my knowledge, neither I nor anyone else in full possession of their faculties has called for black boys to be placed in separate schools. In 2004, I did point out that some small experiments in racially segregated US high schools showed that when African American boys were taught English and maths in all-male classes, their scores improved significantly and immediately. Kenans error is understandable due to an over-enthusiastic BBC PR operation selling this observation as a call for separate schools. Google doesnt always tell the whole story  or even the real one. Trevor PhillipsLondon N6 Brexit threat to our rights The EU (Withdrawal) bill, returning to the Commons this week, will not protect peoples rights in the UK as the government has promised. This is in large part because the bill removes the Charter of Fundamental Rights from our law. The charter protects rights to dignity, protection of personal data and health and protections for workers, women, children, older people, LGBTI and disabled people. The governments analysis of the charter repeats its assurance that rights will not be weakened following Brexit. However, independent legal advice shows this to be wrong. Losing it creates a human rights hole because the charter provides some rights and judicial remedies that have no clear equivalents in UK law. Furthermore, by keeping the wide and complex body of EU law while throwing away the charter that is the code to unlock it, the government risks jamming itself in a mountain of legal cases. Rights without remedies are just symbols. We need legal guarantees in the bill about the kind of society we want to be after Brexit. For the government to honour its promise of preserving existing rights it must retain the protections in the charter.Amnesty International UKEquality and Human Rights CommissionLiberty  Adam Wagner, barrister British Institute of Human Rights Childrens Rights Alliance for England Coram Equality Commission for Northern Ireland Equality and Diversity Forum Fawcett Society Gender Identity Research and Education Society (GIRES) Jonathan Cooper OBE Just Fair National Aids Trust National Alliance of women Organisations (NAWO) The Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission Schona Jolly QC Scottish Human Rights Commission UK Race and Europe Network UK women Budget Group Unlock Democracy Wales Observatory on Human Rights of Children The Bible and the truth I wonder which of the 66 books of the Bible Chris Lovibond was referring to in asking whether it was fact or fiction (Letters)? I would struggle with categorisations, too. The poetry of the Psalms, Song of Songs and large sections of Isaiah: fact or fiction? The apocalyptic visions of Daniel and Revelation: fact or fiction? What about the histories in Samuel and Kings and Chronicles? Most history is written by the victors after the event , but does that make it fiction? I detect a derogatory note in the application of the word fiction to the biblical canon, which is not used when referring to someone such as Margaret Atwood, who creates stories containing truth, as do the parables Jesus told. Was there really such a person as the good samaritan or the prodigal son? Does it matter? Dr Carolyn SandersonMilton Keynes"
"53""It is business as usual for Jacinda Ardern. Seven days after the announcement of her pregnancy, the New Zealand prime minister is out and about under grey skies on a chilly morning in Dunedin to perform that staple of politicians  unveiling a plaque on a historic building.  
 
  Related: #knitforJacinda: New Zealanders join forces to make baby clothes for the needy  
 
Addressing the re-opening of the citys 115-year-old courthouse, Ardern speaks confidently about the priorities of her government  the need for it to protect the countrys heritage, its environment and the future of its children. 
The prime minister affects a routine air. Nothing has changed, the government is getting on with the job. But for the country, it seems, a lot has has changed. New Zealand is in the grip of baby mania. 
Since Ardern and her partner, Clarke Gayford, revealed they were expecting their first child, the announcement has dominated the news agenda, opinion pieces and talk radio. Some current affairs shows have even opened a bottle of bubbly to toast the news. 
 
 
  Aw and he brought us bubbles to toast @jacindaardern and @NZClarke, a Project first! pic.twitter.com/Kho0OksHfN The Project NZ (@TheProject_NZ) 
  January 19, 2018
  
 
First there was Jacindamania and the Jacinda effect; now theres Jacindababymania .More than 800 newspapers and magazines around the world reported the pregnancy; in New Zealand the news has fascinated residents unlike any political story before, as many gossip and debate about what lies ahead. 
Affectionately nicknamed the royal baby, political pundits are predicting a second term for the Labour party on the back of the jubilation sparked by the apparent salve to the turbulent global political climate. 
Meanwhile, the PM has got on with the job: announcing an inquiry into mental health, a fleet of changes to employment laws aimed at improving conditions for workers, and discussing the resuscitation of the Trans-Pacific Partnership. 
Ardern appears slightly taken aback by the interest in her pending motherhood. Im just pregnant, not incapacitated, she said. Like everyone else who has found themselves pregnant before, Im just keeping on going. 
Certainly when I walk around and step outside my house  I get a few honks and hollers and everyone has been very warm. But again, I dont take that to mean absolutely everyone in New Zealand is happy. Ive got work to do to prove that I can fulfil the responsibilities I have, and I absolutely intend to do that and so does the government. 
 
  
  
  Jacinda Ardern with the Vietnamese president, Tran Dai Quang, at a gathering of world leaders and senior business figures in Danang. 
  Photograph: Jorge Silva/AFP/Getty 
  
 
But she will have her work cut out if she hopes to dampen the national interest in her baby. 
Observers point out that voters who may have previously felt shut out of the sometimes elitist realm of political life and decision-making may feel they finally have something in common with their leader  especially as she is going to be using hand-me-down baby clothes. 
In this day and age, parents are quite capable of working and having a family, Im happy for her, said Casey Bosscher, an apprentice builder who explained the court house renovation to Ardern. 
My wife and I have worked the whole way through [having our family]. Anyone who is concerned about the prime ministers pregnancy is old-fashioned  you just do the best you can.. 
In addition to being the countrys third female prime minister and the first to be sworn in while pregnant, Arderns government is implementing a swath of legislation to ease the burden for working families, such as increasing paid parental leave. 
Politics can seem very distant from many peoples everyday lives, but Arderns pregnancy has reflected that politics is a real-life exercise and that enables people to feel a connection with the political world, said Jennifer Curtin, a professor of politics, and the director of the public policy institute at Auckland University. 
Ardern has been in politics for a long time. We know from research that theres no perfect time to have a baby [in politics], and women are more likely than male colleagues to be childless, which suggests it hasnt been a mother-friendly profession. So she is absolutely breaking norms and doing gender equality a huge public service, unwittingly or otherwise. 
Though the news was largely greeted with warm congratulations (one person left a box of doughnuts outside Arderns Auckland home) a trickle of angst and criticism has appeared. 
Some writers have urged Ardern take six months off rather than six weeks, suggesting she will not be able to cope; others have said the nationwide fertility festival has provoked pain and heartache for those who struggle to conceive.  
Even film stars have weighed in, with the French actor Marion Cotillard urging New Zealanders to keep their prime minister. 
Ardern and Gayford celebrated their news with hamburgers, and flowers from the corner shop. Their relaxed approach to trampling gender norms and shaking up parliament is proving a winning formula for many New Zealanders who have navigated the same demands since women began entering the workforce in large numbers in the 1970s.  
Weve come a long way from the time when it was thought women should stay at home to be barefoot and pregnant, said Gill Greer, the chief executive of the National Council of Women of New Zealand.  
[The former prime minister] Helen Clark was criticised and it was said: How can you decide what is good for families when you dont have any children? Now we have another [female] prime minister and, of course, she cant win either with a few people, though I would say they are in the minority. 
Theres that old saying: if girls can see it, girls can do it. And Ardern is proving that. "
"54""Having found herself in the midst of tough coalition negotiations after a closely fought election, Jacinda Ardern was facing far more than her political colleagues could have guessed. 
Six days before becoming New Zealands prime minister-elect, the Labour leader discovered she was pregnant, but was desperate to keep it, and the accompanying morning sickness, a secret during the post-election maelstrom. 
Asked how she managed, Ardern replied: Its just what ladies do, evoking the sympathy of women the world over who just get on with it while struggling with first-trimester nausea. 
The 37-year-old worried her staff might notice she was eating constantly, and only the same foods. But no, she revealed, apparently people thought I was just a women of odd habits, she told stuff.co.nz.  
No one, it seems, rumbled her. None of them noticed I had pretty bad morning sickness while negotiating our government, she told Sky News. 
News that Ardern will give birth in June  shortly after which her television producer partner, Clarke Gayford, will become the primary caregiver  has been hailed as a thrilling landmark. 
Exciting news! tweeted Labours Harriet Harman, the UKs longest-serving female MP and the first pregnant candidate to win an election in 1982. Pregnant prime minister &amp; stay at home dad! New Zealand leads the way! Congrats all round. 
Scotlands first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said the announcement, though foremost a personal moment for Ardern, also helps demonstrate to young women that holding leadership positions neednt be a barrier to having children (if you want to). And the former UK Green party leader Natalie Bennett saw it as another landmark passed for women in politics. 
Ardern said she did not think her position was that different to others. 
Im not a trailblazer, she said. I am not the first women to multitask. I am not the first women to work and have a baby. I know these are special circumstances but there will be many women who will have done this well before I have. 
And, New Zealand is going to help us raise our first child  I think its fair to say that this will be a wee one that a village will raise, but we couldnt be more excited. 
Ardern, once a policy adviser to the former British prime minister Tony Blair, broke the news on Instagram and Facebook, posting a photograph of three fish hooks, two large and one small, in reference to Gayfords passion for fishing. He is host of the popular TV show Fish of the Day.  
 
  
 
In the post she said: Ill be prime minister and a mum, and Clarke will be first man of fishing and stay at home dad. I think its fair to say that this will be a wee one that a village will raise, but we couldnt be more excited. 
She will take six weeks maternity leave  rather that the 22 weeks of paid paternal leave to which New Zealanders are entitled  during which the deputy prime minister, Winston Peters, will take over. She will, however, remain fully contactable throughout, and intends to resume full prime ministerial duties on her return. 
Ardern is one of only a handful of world leaders to give birth in office. Pakistans Benazir Bhutto delivered her second child while in office in 1990. 
 
  
  
   
     
    
    In July 1988, Pakistan's president, Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, announced the country's first elections in more than a decade. His chief opponent, Benazir Bhutto, having said weeks earlier she was expecting&nbsp;her first child, did not see a coincidence.
    \"General Zia called the [elections] thinking that a pregnant women couldn't campaign, she told the BBC. I could, I did and I won, so that disproved that notion.\"
    Her exhausting campaign schedule was only momentarily interrupted when her son was born four weeks early. The decisive win proved that voters could accommodate the idea of a new mother running the country  though it helped that Bhutto was a formidable character from a powerful political dynasty.&nbsp;
    Bhutto became the first democratically elected leader to give birth while in office when her second child arrived in 1990. She had the baby secretly, fearing opponents would use her absence to move against her. \"The next day I was back on the job, reading government papers and signing government files.\"
    She had been pregnant with her third child&nbsp;during political upheaval in which she was teargassed. It was a pretty harrowing experience, she said. [But] I found that the old-fashioned notion that a women who's expecting a child has to be bedridden was absolutely wrong, a women can do anything if she's lucky enough not to have morning sickness.\"
    
   
  
  
 
Ardern and Gayford had been told they needed help conceiving, and put plans on hold when she was promoted to Labour leader in August. They discovered she was pregnant on 13 October and she was sworn in as prime minister two weeks later. 
Asked if the news had weighed on her during coalition negotiations with the New Zealand First party, she replied: I am human. Whose mind wouldnt it play on? 
The couple, however, were delighted with the news. We wanted a family, but werent sure it would happen for us, which has made this news unexpected but exciting, she said.  
Within days of becoming Labour leader, Ardern was twice asked by television hosts about her plans for children. One questioned whether it was acceptable for the countrys leader to take maternity leave while in office, claiming most employers would want to know about their workers maternity plans. 
Ardern, who had previously talked about the difficulties of juggling political life with wanting to start a family, made clear such questions were unacceptable in the workplace in 2017.  
Before becoming New Zealands youngest prime minister since 1856, and its third female leader, she acknowledged it would be difficult to be a parent as well, but said: I dont think they are mutually exclusive and if we want parliament to reflect New Zealand as a society, then we should be able to accommodate both. 
The former prime minister Helen Clark, tweeted her congratulations, adding: Every women should have the choice of combining family and career. 
In New Zealand, which in 1893 became the first country in the world to give women the right to vote, the people seem proud of once more putting equality on the world map. 
Ardern, meanwhile, is insistent her maternal responsibilities will not conflict with those to her country, and she will deliver on both. I know, because of who I am, that I will do the job that Ive been asked to do, that I have a mandate to do. Nothings going to change that. 
 This article was amended on 29 January 2018 to correct a misspelling of Helen Clarks surname from Clarke."
"55""Top story: New American moment, same Trump themes 
Hello and welcome to this hump-day briefing. Im Warren Murray accompanying you on keyboard. 
Donald Trump has preached unity and preened over the countrys growing economy in his first State of the Union speech to Congress. But words could do little to varnish over a year of White House chaos, sexism and racism, falsehoods, attacks on freedom of the press, and the gravity of the Trump-Russia investigation. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
There was praise for the countrys first responders, its services personnel and veterans, some railing against North Korea, and an exhortation that if you work hard, if you believe in yourself, if you believe in America, then you can dream anything, you can be anything, and together, we can achieve anything. As expected, Trump promised a compromise on the status of about 1.8m Dreamers, including a path to citizenship  in return for a wall on the Mexican border and tighter immigration restrictions on legal immigration. 
He spoke of bipartisanship, but there was little else to bridge the gulf with Democrats. Trump announced that he had formally cancelled Barack Obamas plan to close the detention facility at Guantnamo Bay. Terrorists are not merely criminals, he said, they are unlawful enemy combatants. And when captured overseas they should be treated like the terrorists they are. 
Throughout it all Republicans stood, applauded and cheered but Democrats mostly sat stony-faced and sometimes groaned or heckled in protest. Richard Wolffe, on the money as usual, says this was the kind of night Trump loves best  when he can applaud himself. Our US politics reporter Ben Jacobs says Trump sounded far more like a typical politician than he has in the past but, in doing so, made himself as forgettable as a typical politician. Here is the full text of the presidents speech. The Massachusetts representative Joe Kennedy III delivered the Democrats reply. 
* * * 
May: Im not a quitter  Theresa May has used the start of her China trade trip to face down critics and declare she intends to fight on until the next election in 2022. A leadership challenge was a hypothetical situation, said the prime minister  while acknowledging that 48 letters of no confidence from backbenchers to the partys 1922 committee would be enough to throw open the job. In transit, the PM has been dealing with Brexit ructions: in news breaking this morning she has pledged that MPs will see the full version of that embarrassingly leaked Brexit impact report before voting on the final deal. As May courts China for a trade deal, she has cautioned that London and Beijing will not always see eye-to-eye and hinted she has sympathies with US president Donald Trumps protests of unfair trade practices and intellectual property theft by the Chinese. 
* * * 
Blabbing blibber-blubber  Orcas have been taught to blow raspberries in a breakthrough for inter-species communication. OK, thats being a little unduly sarcastic  remarkably, they can also mimic Hello, Bye bye, Amy and one-two. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
We have no evidence that they understand what their hello stands for, says Professor Josep Call from the University of St Andrews. Orcas are known for having different dialects from one pod to another. I think here we have the first evidence that killer whales may be learning sounds by vocal imitation, and this is something that could be the basis of the dialects we observe in the wild, said Call. 
* * * 
Glee actors unexplained death  Mark Salling has been found dead at the age of 35. Salling, who played Noah Puckerman (Puck) on the TV series Glee, was facing up to seven years jail after pleading guilty last year to possessing child abuse images. Mark was a gentle and loving person, a person of great creativity, who was doing his best to atone for some serious mistakes and errors of judgment, Sallings lawyer, Michael Proctor, said. Salling had separately settled a $2.7m lawsuit with a women who sued him for sexual battery. 
* * * 
Poetry in her soul  The poet Helen Dunmore has been posthumously awarded the Costa book prize for her final collection, Inside the Wave, written in the last weeks of her life. Dunmores husband, Frank Charnley, and their children, Patrick and Tess, received the award in London last night. Poetry was in Mums soul, said Patrick Charnley. This collection contains some of the most beautiful writing she completed in her life and it came at the time of her death. 
 
  
  
  Helen Dunmore in 2009. 
  Photograph: Rex Features 
  
 
After Dunmores death, the collection was updated to include the poem Hold Out Your Arms, written just 10 days before she died. In it she imagines death as a mother: You push back my hair /  Which could do with a comb / But never mind  / You murmur / Were nearly there. 
* * * 
And finally  A women who tried to take her emotional support peacock on a plane seemed surprised when the animal was refused permission to board. It is the second example within 24 hours of a peacock feeling the sting of rejection after Brendan Cole was dropped from Strictly Come Dancing. 
Lunchtime read: women rights  100 revolutionary years 
One hundred years after suffrage, there is still so much to campaign for. Today, women including Jo Brand and Archie Panjabi set out the change they would like to see by 2118  from unisex loos to challenging the dominance of male desire. 
 
 s march\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  The London women march. 
  Photograph: SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images 
  
 
Also today: Afua Hirsch on the 1990s, girl power and pornification; Frances Ryan on the emperors new clothes feminism of the 2000s; and Liv Little on why the equality movement needs to be more inclusive of women of colour. Joanne OConnor lists some key upcoming events celebrating the centenary of voting rights for women. There is full coverage in our special series women rights: 100 revolutionary years. 
Sport 
Arsne Wenger lamented the unusual and massive mistakes that led his team to suffer a humiliating defeat against Swansea City, leaving Arsenal with eight points to make up on Liverpool if they retain ambitions of finishing in the top four. At the John Smiths Stadium, Liverpools Roberto Firmino bamboozled flat-footed Huddersfield to stop the rot after two unexpected defeats against teams from the bottom of the Premier League. 
Olivier Giroud is primed to join Chelsea from Arsenal for 17.5m on deadline day, a move that will allow the completion of a chain of transfers that takes Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang to the Emirates Stadium and Michy Batshuayi to Borussia Dortmund. Physically and mentally England are suddenly in a better place than they were a few days ago with Chris Robshaw, Mike Brown and Jack Nowell all back training ahead of schedule and available for this weekends Six Nations kick-off. 
Amir Khan reacted to taunts about his personal life by throwing water over his future opponent Phil Lo Greco as the pair clashed at the press conference promoting their 21 April bout. And an analysis of the last 14 racing seasons and more than one million rides has cast fresh light on the representation of female jockeys in racing and in the best races in particular. 
Business 
Asian stocks have been mixed after Wall Street recorded its biggest decline since August with hefty losses in health care and technology companies. The dollar inched lower during Donald Trumps State of the Union address. 
Sterling was worth $1.417 and 1.140 overnight. 
The papers 
The front pages offer up a mixed bag today. The Telegraph splashes on Britains former chief scientist saying German carmakers have blood on their hands over the animal testing scandal. The Times is focused on property developers who under proposed new rules to kickstart housebuilding could lose the right to use their land if they fail to hit construction targets. Meanwhile the Guardian leads on a pay review at the BBC that found no gender bias and is being rejected by female members of staff. 
 
 s Guardian front page\" width=\"793\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  Todays Guardian front page. 
  
 
The Mail trumpets an exclusive about the nations road policing chief demanding a crackdown on speeding drivers that would see anyone caught going 1mph over the limit getting a fine. The Financial Times leads on Amazon announcing plans to enter the US healthcare industry by teaming up with Berkshire Hathaway and JPMorgan Chase to form a company dedicated to lowering costs. The (old-school) tabloids tell an equally varied story. The Sun goes for a story about the navy sending a plastic mine hunter to intercept two Russian submarines in the English channel. The headline is Were in the ship. The Mirror leads on the great British cancer scandal and news that thousands of patients are dying early because of a lack of funding. On its front page the Daily Express has a story on the secret plot to derail Brexit. 
Sign up 
The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. 
For more news: www.theguardian.com"
"56""On Saturday night hundreds of self-described deplorables, arch-conservative internet personalities, trolls-turned-citizen journalists, and conspiracy theory enthusiasts put on their best suits and cocktail dresses to drink, dance and toast the Trump presidency at an exclusive rightwing social gala called A Night For Freedom. Its unclear if there was an element of trolling in the decision to hold a pro-Trump bonanza in Manhattan, the same day several hundred thousand people participated in a city-wide women march, but if there was, then the partys masterminds were almost foiled at their own game.  Despite elaborate security precautions to prevent infiltration by journalists, protesters and other troublemakers, the event came close to collapsing at the last moment when, in what the event organizers described as a set-up, the scheduled venue abruptly canceled the day before. Organizers scrambled behind the scenes to secure a new venue to accommodate their 750 guests  only for the second venue to also back out at 1am the morning of the event. A Hells Kitchen nightclub finally agreed to host, apparently only after one of the event organizers offered to pay $20,000 in cash up front.   Make America Great Again brooch at A Night for Freedom event in Manhattan.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A women wears a Make America Great Again brooch at the Night for Freedom event in Manhattan. Photograph: Andrew Kelly/Reuters    Outside the nightclub, black-clad protesters taunted arriving guests while a heavy cordon of police stood watch. But stepping inside felt like entering a separate universe. The atmosphere was somewhere between a political fundraiser  with lots of red, white and blue and, at one point, a spoken-word ode to the American flag  and a high school prom. Music thumped in the background. Men wearing Trump-style red ties were everywhere. Guests were giddy with the cathartic high that comes from being in the presence of like-minded people. Many had flown in, and one man told me he had driven five hours to attend. Outside was a hostile world of haters, losers, cucks, globalists, social justice warriors, betas, libtards, and soyboys  but inside was a haven where deplorables could speak freely. Fans geeked out as they took selfies with their favorite rightwing YouTube stars.  The evenings most unexpected guest was Chelsea Manning, who dropped by briefly during the earlier part of the evening to the surprise of those present and the confusion and consternation of leftist social media users, who heard the news on Twitter. Manning later uploaded a picture of herself making a thumbs-down sign, announcing that she had just [c]rashed the fascist/white supremacist hate brigade party, but others disputed her characterization of her presence there.   Yes I literally shook hands with Chelsea Manning [tonight], the left is freaking out, it was not a big deal, Mike Cernovich, the events main organizer, wrote on Twitter. Cernovich, a rightwing muckraker, occasional mens rights advocate, and self-described mindset guru, said he was glad she stopped by. All are welcome to party with me. Twenty years ago the idea that anyone can get their own [social media] account and troll any senator to their face would be regarded as an absurdity, Michael Malice, a fixture of the alternative media sphere, told a cheering crowd.  The gatekeepers who are controlling our information are falling. Twenty years ago there were three channels [sic]. Today there are literally infinite YouTube channels. Infinite Twitter profiles. Infinite Facebook profiles. You cant silence people any longer. At last years DeploraBall members of the anti-establishment movement then known as the alt-right celebrated the inauguration of Donald Trump, a man they credited themselves with having memed into the White House over the resistance of a hostile political and media elite. Even then, few Americans had heard the term alt-right, and the political establishment was only belatedly recognizing the influence exercised by a network of online alternative media outlets and rightwing social media personalities.   Make America Great Again hat listens to speakers at the Night for Freedom party in Manhattan, New York.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A man in a Make America Great Again hat listens to speakers at the Night for Freedom party in Manhattan. Photograph: Andrew Kelly/Reuters    A lot can happen in a year. Today, the movement has a Super Pac. Gateway Pundit, a far-right blog that has been criticized for spreading hoaxes, has been accredited to the White House press corps. Recently Cernovich partnered with BuzzFeed News to release revelations about sexual harassment claims against Michigan representative John Conyers.  As they have moved from the darkest corners of the internet to the white-tableclothed banquet halls of Washington and New York, pro-Trump online provocateurs, famous for their hatred of political correctness, have also been forced to engage in their own project of respectability politics. Members of the repackaged and somewhat sanitized movement consider themselves populists and nationalists, not bigots. As they see it, one can support, say, hardline immigration policies without being racist. As Gavin McInnes, the co-founder of Vice and founder of the Proud Boys, a western chauvinist and anti-feminist group, explained last year to the New Yorkers Andrew Marantz: They [white nationalists] care about the white race. We care about Western values. Do you want to make us look professional, or sloppy? In emails to guests leading up to the event, Cernovich laid out strict rules for decorum, dress code and security protocol. By attending the event, you become a brand ambassador, he wrote. Do you want to make us look professional, or do you want us to look sloppy? Any journalists requesting press passes would be denied (Im bored of the media lying about me and us, and have no interest in press coverage), and, he added, undercover security personnel would be mingling with the guests to keep an eye out for negative or toxic people. But if A Night for Freedom was an opportunity to show off the rebranded and increasingly mainstream alternative right wing, it was also a reminder that mainstream is a relative notion. While the alt-lite may have successfully distanced itself from the worst extremists, it can sometimes seem unclear exactly how lite the new movement is.    A Night for Freedom event in Manhattan, New York, U.S., January 20, 2018. Picture taken January 20, 2018. REUTERS/Andrew Kelly\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Mike Cernovich addresses attendees at A Night for Freedom. Photograph: Andrew Kelly/Reuters    A prolific livestreamer who rails against Democrats, the establishment GOP and the fake news-peddling media to his hundreds of thousands of Twitter and Periscope followers, Cernovich is known for reflexively accusing his detractors of pedophilia, and he was one of the propagators of Pizzagate, the wholly discredited conspiracy theory that high-ranking Democrats were operating a child sex-ring out of the back of a Washington DC pizzeria. Joining Cernovich as the evenings headline acts were McInnes; reality TV star and Trump supporter Anna Khait; political operatives Jack Posobiec and Ali Alexander; and Stefan Molyneux, a far-right podcaster who advocates anarcho-capitalism and racial IQ theories. (Molyneux, who encourages followers to break off contact with their families, has also been accused of operating a therapy cult, a charge he denies.) In a series of panels the speakers, some of whom seemed rather tipsy, offered their thoughts on a greatest-hits list of favorite topics including Hillary Clinton (shes gonna get her time, you guys just wait), cryptocurrency, the dangers of socialism, George Soros (the head of the snake), and the media (leftist propaganda machine).  As a group of Proud Boys stood behind him in matching Fred Perry tennis shirts, McInnes argued that women would be happier under traditional gender strictures, using a vulgar physical analogy to describe how he sees young single women as being exploited by men.    He went on, Why do [progressives] have a problem with traditional people? Youre the ones being left with cats and dogs for sons and daughters. This brought McInnes to one of his recurring preoccupations, natalism. He described his pride at being a father and encouraged listeners to have lots of children. Remember, one [child] is for losers. Two is for fags.   A Night for Freedom event.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Vice magazine co-founder Gavin McInnes speaks at A Night for Freedom. Photograph: Andrew Kelly/Reuters    The evening wore on and the drink flowed freely. In the mens room a drunk man ranted bitterly about the women March. Bunch of fucking pussies out there. And fags. All I know is I aint getting none! he added, for anyone wondering.  Up on the roof, groups of people clustered on a smoking patio. Conversation frequently came back to the deep state, Antifa and when Hillary will face justice for her crimes.  One person was complaining about the protesters outside, some of whom had allegedly attacked guests as they entered.  What do you think is behind that sort of behavior? I asked. Divorce, he said.  Back inside, people danced to the musical stylings of DJ duo Milk N Cooks. On the stage two professional dancers, with identical short blonde hair and American flag leotards, shimmied back and forth. People flooded to the dancefloor. Men loosened their ties. The DJs cycled through various 90s and early 2000s club hits and bar-mitzvah standards  In Da Club, Cant Touch This. An older couple slow-danced sweetly to Africa by Toto.  As it neared midnight, Chumbawamba came on  I get knocked down, but I get up again  and the crowd shouted triumphantly along: You are never gonna keep me down."
"57""On the face of it, Iceland is a good place to be a women. For nearly a decade, it has been rated the worlds most gender-equal country. It was the first to directly elect a female president, nearly half its MPs and company directors are women, and first-class daycare and parental leave help ensure almost four in five women have jobs. 
 So it came as a shock for Fra Rs Valdimarsdttir to learn, when she was managing a key team of 10 home carers at Reykjavik council a few years ago, that male colleagues in other departments, with far fewer responsibilities than her, were being paid a great deal more. 
It has been illegal for decades, for jobs that are worth the same, to pay people differently because of gender, but still it happens  its simply been allowed, says Valdimarsdttir, who is now the chair of the Icelandic women Rights Association, in her bright offices in the countrys capital. 
 
  Related: Iceland's new leader: 'People don't trust our politicians'  
 
Despite an equal pay act that dates back to 1961, Icelandic women still earn, on average, between 14% and 20% less than men. So Valdimarsdttir and her association were one of many campaign groups to back a plan that finally resulted, last month, in the island becoming the first country in the world to legally enforce equal pay. 
Within four years from January 2018, any public or private body in Iceland employing more than 25 people that has not been independently certified as paying equal wages for work of equal value will face daily fines. The legislation will take some time to bed in, of course, Valdimarsdttir says. There will be challenges. But its possible, and we can do it. Mainly, Im just so proud we actually made it happen. 
 
  
 
  
  
   
     
    
    News doesn't always have to be bad  indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do.
    This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come.
    Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com
    
   
  
  
 
Rsa Gurn Erlingsdttir, head of the equality unit at Icelands welfare ministry, says equality wont come about by itself, from the bottom up alone. Our experience is that you need legislative measures to move things forward. People accept that; we saw it with mandatory quotas for women on company boards. If politicians want to wait until no one opposes it, it will never happen. 
Some in Iceland still do oppose it, albeit cautiously. The new law requires employers to show, through certification by an accredited auditor, that their pay management system complies with a national equal pay standard modelled on the international ISO environmental management standards familiar to all companies.  
The standard was published in 2012 and welcomed by Icelands trade unions and employers, who helped design it. Hannes Sigursson of the Business Iceland confederation says it was considered sound business sense, likely to improve a companys image in the eyes of its customers, and make its workforce a whole lot happier. 
It was, however, designed to be voluntary. It was a carrot, win-win, Sigursson says. The government has turned it into a stick. 
 
 s Finnbogadttir, pictured in 1980, was the worlds first directly elected female president. She served from 1980 to 1996.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  Vigds Finnbogadttir, pictured in 1980, was the worlds first directly elected female president. She served from 1980 to 1996. 
  Photograph: Bettmann/Bettmann Archive 
  
 
The process  assessing the worth of very different jobs, classifying and ranking occupations, analysing salary structures, collating and recording data, making sure the new system meshes with collective labour agreements  is quite complex, he says. You need to put resources into it. Its easier for big companies, with whole HR departments. 
As it stands, the legislation is staggered over four years. Large firms and institutions such as government ministries and the national hospital, with workforces of more than 250 people, have until the end of this year to become certified; those with fewer than 90 employees but more than 25 have until the end of 2021. The fine for those that do not comply is ISK50,000 (350) a day. And the public shame, it is hoped, will be worse. 
None of Business Icelands members have openly criticised the new law, Sigursson says. Its quite difficult to come out publicly against a measure that enhances gender equality. But I think its clear there is opposition to the method. We would have preferred the process to be bottom-up. 
 
  Related: Tesco equal pay claim could cost supermarket up to 4bn  
 
Others, however, are delighted. This will not eliminate the gender pay gap overnight, says Maranna Traustadttir, an equality adviser at the Icelandic trade union confederation ASI. But it is the best toolbox I have seen, and it will make a big difference. It will force employers to think differently. 
It will not be straightforward, she concedes. Deciding the relative value of a canteen worker and a driver, for example. Documenting and justifying everything ... But we now have clear guidelines to follow, courses to go on, specialist software, new consultants to help. Its doable. Several companies already have. 
Traustadttir cites Reykjavik Energy, the parent company of Icelands largest power provider, which was forced to fire one-third of its workforce in the aftermath of the financial crash, but seized on its subsequent restructuring as an opportunity to become a fully gender-equal employer. 
Within five years, by putting the gender glasses on before taking every single decision, it had boosted the proportion of women in management positions from 29% to 49%. Over the same period, its adjusted gender pay gap shrank from 8.4% to 2.1%  and now stands at 0.2% in favour of women.  
 
  Related: Trust is broken at BBC over equal pay, Carrie Gracie tells MPs  
 
The companys chief executive, Bjarni Bjarnason, says the net outcome has been more open discussions, higher productivity, greater job satisfaction, improved decision-making, higher morale, and an all-round far better atmosphere. 
For many, the legislation reflects the fact that more than 40 years after 90% of Icelands women famously went on strike for a day, the country is not quite the gender-equality paradise its often painted, says Annads Grta Rdlfsdttir, an assistant education professor. That WEF index is fairly crude. It doesnt reflect the pay gap, or gender-based violence. We have our fair share of toxic masculinity. #MeToo was as shocking here as anywhere. 
Her colleague, Berglind Rs Magnsdttir, says a broader re-engineering of society is still needed. This wont fix the huge gap between typically male and typically female sectors, she says. Between engineering, for example, and nursing or teaching. Anything to do with care or education is paid less. 
But there is confidence the legislation is a major step in the right direction. The pay gap was hidden behind a lack of transparency, says Magnea Marinsdttir of the welfare ministrys equality unit, noting that the standard could be used to justify a pay difference as much as to eliminate it.  
 
  Related: Mothers working part-time hit hard by gender pay gap, study shows  
 
 
  
 
  Sign up for a weekly email digest from this series
  
 
Employers can take into account experience, qualifications  its just that it now has to be transparent, and justified, Marinsdttir adds. The standard is simply designed to eliminate factors that are irrelevant by law  such as gender. It could equally be used to eliminate discrimination by race or disability. 
Legislation, she is convinced, can impact attitudes and behaviour. Weve seen that time and again. We still live in a very gendered reality in Iceland. Even here, the patriarchal culture, a male sense of entitlement, is deep-rooted. This can be a real impetus for change.  
Erlingsdttir says the Icelandic model could also be adopted elsewhere: Portugal is exploring doing so, raising the possibility that Icelands equal pay standard could eventually become a European one. The information is there, and the education is there, she says. Now we need the effort.  
This article is part of a series on possible solutions to some of the worlds most stubborn problems. What else should we cover? 
 
 \"> 
 
If youre having trouble using the form, click here."
"58""Canadas national anthem is set to become gender neutral, bringing an end to a decades-long push to ensure the English language version reflects all Canadians.  Senators passed legislation on Wednesday that will change the second line of the anthem from in all thy sons command to in all of us command. Once the legislation is given royal assent by the governor general, the tweak will become law. The change has been more than three decades in the making, said Canadian senator Frances Lankin. This may be small  its about two words  but its huge in terms of one of our major national symbols. Its inclusivity and Im proud.    Related: Whimper no more: Peru national anthem bound for glory    Amid bitter debate over the issue, the bill had been stalled for 18 months as Conservatives argued that all Canadians should be consulted in the matter. This is an issue for the Canadian public to decide not just a couple of independent senators, Senator Don Plett told the CBC.  Recent decades have seen 12 bills introduced in the House of Commons aimed at ridding the anthem of gendered language. The French language version uses different lyrics and does not include the same line. The idea began to gain traction in 2013 after a group of prominent Canadian women, including author Margaret Atwood and former prime minister Kim Campbell, took on the issue. They argued that the anthem had once been gender neutral  using the phrase thou dost in us command  but had been changed to include the word sons in 1913.   Restoring these lyrics to gender-neutral is not only an easy fix to make our anthem inclusive for all Canadians, but its also long overdue, Atwood said at the time. On Thursday, Atwood expressed her delight on Twitter over the bills passage.     Thank you @SenateCA!   &#39;In all of us command&#39;: Senate passes bill approving #genderneutral anthem wording Margaret E. Atwood (@MargaretAtwood) February 1, 2018    The legislation passed on Wednesday was introduced by a Liberal MP, Mauril Blanger, who had long argued that the small change would ensure that more than 18 million Canadian women are included in our national anthem. His first attempt was shot down by Conservative politicians, who in 2010 briefly toyed with making the same tweak, arguing that a 2013 poll that found 65% of Canadians were opposed to changing the anthem. One year later, Blanger introduced the same legislation. This time the Liberals used their majority government to push the bill through. After being diagnosed with Lou Gehrigs disease, Blanger died in 2016. "
"59""While Finland has achieved a lot of progress in creating a Nordic welfare state based on social equality (Letters, 16 February), we have to ask which groups are entitled to such values. With the Sami, Roma, migrants and other minorities, this is, unfortunately, not the case. As the government of Prime Minister Juha Sipil scales back funds to the education system and social welfare state, we see a problem arising that has not been readily acknowledged by white Finland: social inequality, racism and discrimination. The mass&#xa0;deportation of Iraqis and Afghans, who came to Finland from 2015, is a sad case in point. It wasnt too long ago when foreigners  never mind minorities like the Sami  didnt have equal civil rights never mind the right to speak their language at schools. It was only after EU membership in 1995 that Finland started, at least in the law, to be more open to difference and to the outside world. The parliamentary election victory of the populist anti-immigrant True Finns party in 2011 was a stark reminder that many want to turn back the clock to more harrowing times for minorities and migrants.Enrique TessieriMikkeli, Finland   Finland has an unknown very kind side. Both Finland and Estonia have reached 100 years since independence from the Russian empire (into which both were incorporated against their will). What never gets talked about is the winter war of 1939, which the Finns won against the Russians. How could they ally with them the following year? Neutrality meant nothing. Both Estonia and Finland, republics, were neutral at the outbreak of the second world war. During the war, Finnish pilots saved medieval Tallinn from being bombed flat by the allies (the Russians). When Estonia declared independence again, in 1991, huge material and moral help and ideas came from Finland. Now, together, they lead European great education. Thank you lovely Finland, keep going.Elo Allik-SchnemannLondon  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"60""Debate over the inclusion of self-identifying trans women in women-only spaces intensified this week, as another group met privately to discuss the contentious issue. Members of the famous women-only swimming pond on Hampstead Heath in London held a meeting on Thursday to discuss perspectives on transgender swimming after a decision to explicitly allow trans women access. Press were excluded from the private meeting of 100 of the 400 members of the Kenwood Ladies Pond Association (KLPA), which the Guardian understands was called after concerns around its stated policy were raised.  Its an important issue, said one insider. There are different views about trans women using the pond and some of us are concerned about the fact that it has always been the only all-women swimming place in Britain. Activists from the radical feminist group Mayday 4 Women stood outside the meeting urging members to lobby to keep the Hampstead Heath ladies pond a sanctuary for women. They handed out leaflets saying: Males already have have access to two ponds: the mens pond and the mixed pond. Why should they have access to three ponds when they already have access to two? In January, the City of London, which manages Hampstead Heath and its ponds, confirmed that the ladies pond  which counts famous people such as Helena Bonham Carter and novelist Esther Freud among its swimmers  welcomed trans women. It said trans women have been able to use the Kenwood Ladies Pond since the introduction of the Equality Act 2010, which prohibits unlawful discrimination on the grounds of transgender status. A spokesman said all lifeguards and managers at the ponds had taken trans awareness training. The City of London Corporation is committed to gender respect and equality in all forms, he said.  In a statement, the KLPA said it was committed to helping to create at the Ladies Pond an inclusive environment for all women, including transgender women, which is free from discrimination, harassment or victimisation. Although it is tempting to assume someones gender simply by their appearance, its important to try to avoid doing so and to be aware of the needs of genuinely transgender women. The diverse community of women and girls  including transgender women  at the Ladies Pond contribute to its unique and very precious quality. We believe that with a continued commitment from all swimmers to respect the rights to privacy and dignity of others, we can continue to protect and enjoy it. Asked if there was unease in the group, a spokeswomen for the KLPA said: There has been unease amongst some members following a report in the Mail on Sunday on 31 December 2017, which quotes one swimmer and reported a single incident that occurred last year (details of which remain uncertain). Protesters against the move said admitting trans women into women spaces would eventually open the door to all men. Mayday 4 Women urged members attending the meeting to represent the voices of women to have a space where women can feel safe, bring their daughter and not worry about a man who says hes a women being allowed through the gates, said Jen Izaakson.  Personally, I dont see a difference between a man who says hes a man or a man who says hes a women. Its not about a physical change, men are socialised to be more violent than women and its men whom women feel frightened of when they are getting undressed. Labour is currently consulting on the inclusion of trans women in all-women shortlists without a gender recognition certification, while the government unveiled proposals to streamline the process of changing gender, with a consultation promised for this year. Trans campaigners argue the current need to be assessed and diagnosed by clinicians in order to obtain a certificate is intrusive and unnecessarily medical.  Feminist writer Julie Bindel said: There have been trans women at the pond for decades, but this self-identification nonsense means theres nothing at all you can do if a person with a penis and a beard comes to the pool and starts getting his kit off  its just mad, she said. Sex is a protected class for a good reason, because we have been raised under the patriarchy and have massive disadvantages. And until we really do have an end to this oppression that we face, we cant say ok, you say you are a women, so you are a women. Regular pond user Vanessa Pelz-Sharp, 34, said she welcomed the move from the KLPA to explicitly welcome trans women. The idea that men would dress in women swimwear to ogle women was like the gay panic in the 80s, she said. I understand that people are frightened of men, thats why we have female-only spaces. [Excluding trans women] says you see these women as men but they are not, they are women, just trans women. There is more to being a women than your genitalia. A trans women, who did not wish to be named, who has used the pond for several years and felt comfortable doing so said she was grateful for the wonderful space.  As a trans women, that women-only space has been of huge benefit to me, its been a comfortable space to not worry about the danger of men around me and be able to relax more than I could do in a mixed swimming space, she said. All of the sense of safety people talk about, they are equally there and equally important to the trans women users."
"61""By the age of eight, Katrn Jakobsdttir was reading Agatha Christie. A couple of decades later, she wrote her masters dissertation on the works of Arnaldur Indridason, a king of Nordic noir. In literature, crime is her thing. It is a specialism that might stand her in good stead in her new real-life job, as prime minister of Iceland and, at 42, Europes youngest female leader. Crime fiction, she said, only half-joking, is about not really trusting anyone. And thats generally how politics works. Brought almost to its knees by the 2008 crisis, Iceland has since been rocked by a succession of ethical and financial scandals that have left voters deeply disaffected by what many see as the endemic  and largely unpunished  cronyism and corruption of their political and business classes.  As a consequence, Jakobsdttir, a slight, driven 42-year-old is the countrys fourth prime minister in two years. A socialist, a feminist and an environmentalist, she heads the Left-Green Movement and has bold policy goals on climate change, gender equality and public services. But perhaps her most daunting challenge will be to change this north Atlantic islands political culture, and to restore the confidence of its 340,000 people in their politicians  while heading an unlikely coalition with the two conservative parties most closely associated with those scandals.  A lot has happened in Icelandic politics, and people really dont trust Icelandic politicians, Jakobsdttir said in an interview in her central Reykjavik office. I cant blame them. But now we need to think how we can best rebuild trust in politics. She said many on the left were still very angry with me for her decision to form a left-right coalition after last Octobers parliamentary elections  Icelands fifth since 2017  with the conservative Independence party, part of nearly every Icelandic government since 1944, and the centre-right Progressives. The leader of the former, Bjarni Benediktsson, has been embroiled in multiple scandals: Icelands last government, which he led, collapsed less than a year after taking office when it emerged he had known for months that his father wrote a letter supporting the rehabilitation of a notorious convicted paedophile.  After revelations in the Guardian, Benediktsson also faced awkward questions over the sell-off, when he was still an MP, of millions of krna of his assets in a big Icelandic banks investment fund just as the government was seizing control of the countrys failing financial sector at the height of the crisis. His name also appeared in the Panama Papers leak that forced the resignation of his predecessor as prime minister, Sigmundur Dav Gunnlaugsson. Then the leader of the Progressive party, Gunnlaugsson stepped down in 2016 amid public fury at revelations that his family had sheltered money offshore.     People demonstrate against Gunnlaugsson in Reykjavik. Photograph: Reuters    A writer and academic with three young boys whose mother was a psychologist and whose twin brothers are both university professors, friends whisper that Jakobsdttir  known in Iceland, like everyone else, by her first name  has both Benediktsson, her finance minister, and current Progressive party leader Sigurur Ingi Jhannsson, her transport minister, round her little finger. She, unsurprisingly, refuses to say very much about that, beyond I know them well and everything is going very smoothly. But scandal-tainted or not, going into government with a pair of alpha-male conservative heavyweights was absolutely the right thing to do, she said.  First, the financial scandals date to a time, before the crisis, when there were few ethical rules for politicians, no rules or regulations on how you present your interests, she noted. That was astonishing, but its no longer the case. Beyond that, though, I look at it pragmatically, not moralistically. I think, Were here now, we need to change the system, so we need everyone at the table. Not, Im not going to work with you because you did things I think are morally wrong. Codes of ethical conduct dont work like normal legislation, Jakobsdttir insisted. They work because everyone sits down together and says, We need to work rules out for ourselves. And then they need to look carefully at how well those rules have worked, which were now doing.  A late developer economically and politically, Iceland needs systemic change to restore confidence, she said. But doing it this way, having very different parties  in both their political perspective and their cultures  working together  Yes, its a gamble. But I really think its an opportunity for us to rethink, reinvent ourselves. Proof of whether it pays off will be in the achievements of her government, which has a wafer-thin majority of just 35 MPs in the 63-seat Alingi. Of Icelands four most recent governments, only one, the left-leaning administration in which Jakobsdttir served as education minister from 2009, served a full four-year term. It certainly has ambitions, the first of which is to boost spending on health, education and public transport after years of post-crisis austerity. Iceland fell into a deep recession following the 2008 crash, during which its three major banks failed with liabilities of 11 times the countrys GDP. The stock market plummeted by 97%, the value of the krna halved, and Iceland became the first western European country in 25 years to ask the IMF for a bailout. With a reformed financial sector, growth of 4.9% last year, and unemployment down at just 2.5%, the economy has bounced back strongly on the back of an unprecedented tourist boom, but that progress has not been shared enough, or delivered into public infrastructure, Jakobsdttir said. On the environment, Iceland aims to be carbon neutral by 2040  a more ambitious target than the Paris climate accords. Its doable, Jakobsdttir said confidently. Iceland has renewable energy resources; we have a head start. But again, we wont manage it unless everyone pulls together. She is also determined to push the country further on gender equality. This month it became the first country in the world to enforce an equal pay standard, but Iceland is not a gender paradise, she said. We have done a lot of good things here, but there are fewer women in this parliament than in the last one. Were not there yet.  The #MeToo revolution was as much of an eye-opener here as anywhere, Jakobsdttir said, revealing a country in which entrenched inequality and male power games had survived untouched. Combating gender-based violence and discrimination would be an absolute priority starting at home, with government institutions and the political parties. But she is, she said, cautiously optimistic for the left. I think the politics of this century are going to revolve a lot around left and right, she said. Its about people who can hardly live on their salaries, peoples rights ... How people are treated. Weve never had a greater need for equality. How we do it doesnt matter. "
"62""Most UK employers believe a women should have to disclose if she is pregnant during a recruitment process, according to depressing statistics from the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC).  The EHRC warned that many businesses were decades behind the law after a YouGov survey of 1,106 senior decision-makers revealed that a third of those working for private companies thought it was reasonable to ask a women about her plans to have children in the future during the recruitment process, 59% said she should have to disclose if she is pregnant and almost half (46%) said it was also reasonable to ask a women if she had small children. Rebecca Hilsenrath, the chief executive of the EHRC, said the findings were depressing and accused many British companies of living in the dark ages. We should all know very well that it is against the law not to appoint a women because she is pregnant or might become pregnant. Yet we also know women routinely get asked questions around family planning in interviews, she said. Its clear that many employers need more support to better understand the basics of discrimination law and the rights of pregnant women and new mothers. The survey also found that 44% of employers believed women should work for an organisation for at least a year before deciding to have children, while the same number said women who had more than one pregnancy while in the same job could be a burden to their team.  The research chimes with the hundreds of examples of discrimination recorded by the website Pregnant then Screwed. One 32-year-old media worker was told in an interview that they really liked me but I had one child already and soon I would probably want another so they would have to be careful how much they invested in me.  A 29-year-old senior human resources executive said she was told in her interview that the company didnt want to have someone that leaves the office at 6pm because of some nursery run. We need someone who is committed.  Stories of overt discrimination in the recruitment process were shockingly common, said Joeli Brearly, the founder of Pregnant then Screwed. The perception that mothers fall behind, are less committed or ambitious is absurd. Women are very capable of using both their brains and their uterus simultaneously, she said.  The fact is that companies with more women in senior positions are more prosperous and profitable, therefore it is in the interest of employers to eliminate conscious and unconscious bias towards pregnant women and new mums. According to the EHRC survey, 40% of employers claim to have seen at least one pregnant women in their workplace take advantage of their pregnancy, and about a third believe new mothers in work are generally less interested in career progression compared with other employees. Four in 10 employers agree that pregnancy in the workplace puts an unnecessary cost burden on the workplace. Half said there is sometimes resentment among employees towards women who are pregnant or on maternity leave, while a third do not think it is easy to protect expectant or new mothers from discrimination in the workplace.  The EHRC has launched Working Forward, a campaign to improve workplaces for pregnant women and new parents and urged companies to sign up for a pledge to treat them fairly.  Carole Easton, the chief executive of the Young women Trust, said the research supported findings from the charity that revealed that one in seven employers would be reluctant to hire a women they thought would go on to have children and 39% of young mums had been illegally asked about how being a mother would affect their ability to work.  Todays EHRC findings show many employers, given half a chance, would run roughshod over women rights, she said. Its no wonder women are held back in the workplace when people have such outdated, discriminatory views [...] Its not just employers attitudes that need to change; society as a whole should support men to take an equal role in childcare. Until that happens, women will continue to face discrimination at work. I am still so angry about what happened Anna (not her real name) described her very bad experience while working for a local authority. She was on a temporary contract and believed she was in line for advancement, including a permanent contract. I waited until I was 20 weeks to tell my employer as I didnt want my pregnancy to count against me, she wrote on the Pregnant then Screwed website. My male boss was perfectly nice when I told him, but seemed to think I would want to give up work once I had a baby. I was sidelined from projects and put on light duties. When the job she was already doing came up as a permanent contract she applied for the role. I was patronisingly told my priorities would change and that once I had my baby I wouldnt want the job, she said. She was interviewed but didnt get the role. He [...] said he discussed the interview with his wife (she doesnt have anything to do with the local authority) and they had agreed my priorities would change, she said.  Without work and seven-and-a-half-months pregnant, she had two interviews for different jobs, but did not get hired. After having her baby she got another job with another local authority who said she was an outstanding candidate. They didnt know I had a two-month-old, she said. I am still so angry about what happened and wouldnt wish anyone else to go through what I went through. "
"63""Some of the most significant challenges that we are interested in exploring in this series are community breakdown, gender discrimination and protecting the environment. This week, Guardian journalists ventured around the world to report on initiatives tackling all three. Libby Brooks reported from Scotland on radical plans to offer permanent housing to even the most entrenched rough sleepers with mental health or addiction problems. Social Bites project works on the assumption that people make most progress when based in a stable home rather than a hostel or shared temporary accommodation, Brooks wrote.  Similar schemes in the US and Finland have had success, and the British government has agreed to fund further pilots across England. The money for the Scottish project  which will house at least 600 rough sleepers  was raised by a mass public sleep-out in freezing temperatures last December. A few hundred miles further north, Iceland has different preoccupations. Last month it became the first country in the world to legally enforce equal pay for men and women. Even in the worlds most gender-equal country, Icelandic women still earn, on average, between 14% and 20% less than men. Enforcement will be complicated, Jon Henley writes, requiring significant time and money, and some have complained about the top-down approach. Well be keeping a keen eye on how it goes. Sticking with the theme of innovative islands, we reported from the Seychelles on a groundbreaking debt for dolphins plan to write off national debt in exchange for creating two huge marine parks. Our seas are in urgent need of rescue: a survey this week found more than 50% of the ocean vastness is now commercially fished. Dont forget, we want you to join us in our Upside project. If you know of a community anywhere in the world that is working to fix a local problem, tell us about it using this secure form. And if there is a story, innovation or everyday hero you think we should report on, write to us at theupside@theguardian.com. What we liked This BBC radio documentary on hydroponics  growing plants in water without any soil. New twists on the old technique could help shape the future of food. Also Steven Pinkers Guardian article arguing the importance of work like the Upside. The consequences of negative news are themselves negative, he wrote. What we heard   Id like the Upside to cover debt-for-nature swaps and other policies which aim at making forests pay for local people. Many of the worlds most precious forests lie in poor countries, where they are vulnerable to population pressure and illegal logging. We have a collective interest in their protection.  Chris Armstrong, in response to our request for input here.  Where was the upside? In Bali, where thousands of people will gather this weekend to clean beaches ravaged by tourism and a daily tide of plastic debris and other garbage.  "
"64""Western Europes last naturally caused famine ended 150 years ago this winter. In a poor and backward part of the Russian empire called Finland, more than a quarter of a million people  nearly 10% of the population  starved to death.  
Last year, on the centenary of its independence, Finland was ranked, by assorted international indices, the most stable, the safest and the best-governed country in the world. It was also the third wealthiest, the third least corrupt, the second most socially progressive and the third most socially just. 
Finlands judicial system is the most independent in the world, its police the most trusted, its banks the soundest, its companies the second most ethical, its elections the second freest, and its citizens enjoy the highest levels of personal freedom, choice and wellbeing. 
The Nordic countrys 5.5 million inhabitants are also the third most gender-equal in the world and have the fifth lowest income inequality. Their babies are the least underweight, their kids feel the most secure, and their teens perform the second best at reading (only third at science, though). 
In a century and a half, they seem to have done rather well. And so, as the Guardian embarks on a new series investigating the things that are going right in the world, it feels natural to start in Helsinki. 
 
  
  Every person has to work hard for themselves. But that is not always enough. You have to help your neighbours 
   
   Tarja Halonen 
   
  
 
If you look at where we were then and where we are now, I think, absolutely, you can talk about a Finnish miracle, said Bengt Holmstrm, a Helsinki-born Nobel prize-winning economist not much given to exaggeration. How and why did it happen? Now thats a question. 
There are limits, of course, to the usefulness of this kind of exercise: no two countries  their circumstances, their histories, their people  can be the same. Learnings may not be transferable. The magic sauce that made Finland would not produce the same results in, say, France.  
It is true, too, that shown the long list of social and economic measures by which their country can only be judged a success, many Finns snort: emerging slowly from a long recession, with unemployment at 8% and a populist, nationalist party garnering up to 20% of the vote, the countrys not what it was, they say. Often, the response  only semi-joking  is, You mean other countries are worse?  
 
  
  
   
     
    
    News doesn't always have to be bad  indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do.
    This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come.
    Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com
    
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
  Sign up here for a weekly email roundup from this series
  
 
But inquiring after the sauces recipe of, among others, an economist, a philosopher, a sociologist and an ex-president, intriguing ingredients emerge.  
To begin with, the geography  and its consequence, the climate. We live, Tarja Halonen, Finlands president from 2000 to 2012, says carefully, in a cold, harsh and remote place. Every person has to work hard for themselves. But that is not always enough. You have to help your neighbours. 
Bruce Oreck, who served as Barack Obamas ambassador to Helsinki (he liked it so much he stayed), says this has been a profound, long-term influence. Its made Finns self-reliant, private, but also dependent on a highly cooperative society, where rules matter. Its cultural, but its become part of the chemistry. 
Of all the Finnish words that are hard to translate into English, the one Finns cite most is sisu: a kind of dogged, courageous persistence regardless of consequence. It is what, in 1939-40, allowed an army of 350,000 men to twice fight off Soviet forces three times their number, and inflict losses five times heavier than those they sustained.  
 
  
  
  The Finnish icebreaker ship Sisu, named after the countrys term for a certain dogged stoicism. 
  Photograph: Alamy 
  
 
But there is another that is, perhaps, more revealing, says Sirpa Khknen, an award-winning historical novelist. Talkoo means working together, collectively, for a specific good, she says. Getting the harvest in, stocking wood, raising money. Its about cooperating. Everyone together, equally. 
Cooperation, but also relative equality, are recurring themes. Ruled for almost 600 years by Sweden and a further century by Russia, Finland was generally and democratically poor, says Khknen. There were no serfs, but no wildly wealthy aristocrats either. Society was not hierarchical. 
Since long before independence in 1917, says Riitta Jallinoja, a sociologist, gaps between the social classes in Finland have been smaller than usual. Even the industrial revolution here was modest: no Rothschilds, no Fords, not even a dynasty like Swedens Wallenbergs. 
Even in todays clean, functional, visibly prosperous Helsinki, that still sort of holds. You can be walking down the street next to the richest guy in town, and you really wouldnt know, says Oreck. In Finland, insists Halonen, You dont look up at people, and you dont look down. You look level.  
 
  Related: But first, here is the (good) news   
 
The countrys most successful current firm, games studio Supercell, creator of Clash of Clans, paid over 800m in tax, producing seven of Finlands top 10 income tax payers in 2016. Along with the rest of the countrys highest 10,000 or so highest earners, the amount they pay is published in an annual list, on national envy day. Finland is big on civic duty, but also on transparency. 
The success of the countrys free national education system, established before independence in 1866 and regularly ranked among the worlds best, also has its roots in a more egalitarian society, says Jallinoja: Education was the key to advancement.  
Not only that, says the philosopher and professor emeritus Ilkka Niiniluoto, but the whole country is actually a social construction created by university professors. The academics who led the countrys nationalist movement created Finland as a nation: its language, history, literature, music, symbols, folklore. The nationalist leader was a philosophy professor. 
Since independence, nearly 30% of Finlands heads of state and government have been university professors, including half its early prime ministers. They shaped the country as we know it, says Jallinoja. But vitally, they also created confidence in social mobility, and real belief in education. That history comes with us.  
If, however, Finland has been rated the worlds most literate country, it may also have something to do with a 19th-century decree that a couple could not marry in the Lutheran church before both passed a reading test. Quite an incentive, observes Halonen, to learn to read. 
 
 800m in tax in 2016.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  Ilkka Paananen, CEO of game developer Supercell, which paid over 800m in tax in 2016. 
  Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
  
 
Gender equality, similarly, was baked in. In 1906, Finnish women became, if not quite the first to win the vote, the first to run for electoral office. Nearly 10% of MPs in Finlands first parliament were women (the figure is now 42%); as early as 1930, up to 30% of university students were women. Women in Finland took their rights seriously, and men accepted it, says Halonen.  
Other ingredients have since added to the sauce. Finland benefited enormously from wise wartime and postwar leaders, insists Holmstrm: They thought about the good of the country; took big, sensible decisions. And the consensus backed them, because everyone knew we were fighting for our existence. 
Responsible choices were made, invariably by continuity-conscious coalition governments, on big industrial and infrastructure investments, that have paid dividends many times over. More recently, todays high-tech, startup-friendly Finland was born of record investment in research and development in the 1990s, nearing 4% of GDP.  
Steady growth  through war, the collapse of the Soviet Union and a deep recession in the 1990s, Finlands economy has expanded over the past century at a rate equalled only by Japans  has bolstered trust in the nations institutions. People criticise the government constantly, and often for very good reason, says Khknen. But fundamentally, they do trust it. 
As they do, on the whole, their welfare state  on which Finland spends 31% of its GDP, the second highest proportion in the OECD. (If youre going to have a welfare state, says Halonen, the only real way to it is so well that theres no point having a private alternative.)  
But Finns also trust each other more than most, says Andr Chaker, a Canadian-born lawyer and public speaker who has lived in the country for 25 years. Corruption and organised crime are all but nonexistent. That feeds into the business environment, he says. Things get done here faster, more reliably.  
 
  Related: The Guardian view on Finlands centenary: a social democratic triumph | Editorial  
 
And it is trust that breeds confidence, and a willingness to innovate: the World Economic Forum ranks Finland the most innovative country, per capita, in the world. For years dominated by monolithic mining and forestry firms, then by the once-mighty Nokia, Finland today is close behind Silicon Valley in the number of startups per head.  
The magic sauce, then, seems based mainly on basic virtues: self-confidence, cooperation, equality, respect for education, trust. At bottom and in practice, says Anu Partanen, a Finnish journalist who now lives in New York, it boils down to a different quality of relationship. She calls it  since it is shared to a greater or lesser extent by Sweden, Norway and Denmark  the Nordic theory of love.  
In the family, its realising that relationships can only really flourish between individuals  parents, children, spouses  who are equal and independent, Partanen says. In a society, it means policy choices aimed at ensuring the greatest possible degree of independence, freedom and opportunity for everyone. 
This article is part of a series on possible solutions to the worlds biggest problems. What else should we cover? 
 
 \"> 
 
If youre having trouble using the form, click here. 
 "
"65"" Donald Trump should treat people  especially women  with more respect and continue investments in poorer countries for the sake of global security, Bill and Melinda Gates said on Tuesday. 
Melinda Gates said: I wish our president would treat people, and especially women, with more respect when he speaks and tweets. 
And Bill Gates warned that the Trump administrations proposed budget could directly lead to millions of preventable deaths around the globe, because of vast cuts to foreign aid and development funds. 
At an event with his wife to mark their foundations annual philanthropic letter, he said: US generosity  if that goes away, even a 10% cut would mean 5 million deaths over the next decade.  
The Trump administration, as it did last year, has proposed billions of dollars in cuts to foreign aid, which makes up less than 1% of US spending. Last year, lawmakers in Congress from both parties mostly ignored the request, and Gates said he hoped they would again this year too. 
In a separate interview, Melinda Gates criticized Trumps habit of using Twitter to attack women and minority groups. 
Those kinds of comments just dont belong in the public discourse, she told the Associated Press. She added that while some of Trumps comments about women have troubled her, his rejection of the feminist label has not. 
Some men have trouble and some women, quite frankly, have trouble embracing that term and what it means, so that honestly doesnt bother me. Its more the specific comments hes made over and over again about specific people or minorities or women that just do not reflect the values I see across the United States, she said. 
In the Gates Foundation letter, the couple said: Equality is an important national principle. The sanctity of each individual, regardless of race, religion, sexual orientation, or gender, is part of our countrys spirit.  
Bill Gates called on Trump not to cut aid to the developing world. He said: To have Africa be stable, to have health systems that stop pandemics, and to reduce the chance of our army having to go fight somewhere and lose lives: these investments, even in that sort of America first mindset, are still very, very wise. 
 
  
  
   
    
    The Gates Foundation letter began as an open letter from Bill and Melinda Gates to their largest benefactor, the investment guru Warren Buffett, whose 2006 gift of $30bn allowed the organization to expand to its current size. Since then, the letter has become more of an informal annual report outlining recent research findings in relation to world development and future priorities. The Gateses liberal outlook is generally focused on the global alleviation of poverty and disease.
    Previous letters have zeroed in on specific interventions, usually the result of scientific or technological breakthroughs, and how they can be used to assuage various entrenched societal problems. In 2015, for example, the letter looked at how mobile banking could change money management in the developing world, and how agricultural innovations could increase crop yield in poor countries forced to spend billions on importing food.&nbsp;For the 2018 missive, the couple decided to use a question and answer format, addressing what they say are some of the most common queries people have about the foundation  which is the worlds largest and is regarded as influential internationally. Melinda Gates called them 10 tough questions and welcomed those questioning the foundations activities.&nbsp;Jamiles Lartey
    
   
  
  
 
Melinda Gates also expressed dismay at the administrations budget zeroing out funds for contraception. 
Youre leaving women in destitute poverty if you dont fund contraceptives, she said. The budget move follows Trumps executive order instituting a gag rule on US-funded international NGOs providing abortion services. 
The Gates foundation is the largest philanthropic organization in the world, with an endowment of more than $40bn. For the past 10 years, Bill and Melinda Gates have released an annual letter outlining the state of their work and focus areas for the following year. 
Despite concern about the effects of cuts to US aid, the pair remained optimistic. The world is getting better by almost every objective measure, Bill Gates said, citing the example of child mortality, the foundations top priority in recent years.When we got going, about 12 million kids were dying a year under the age of five. Now, because of vaccines and things that weve done with partners, that number is under 5 million."
"66""Dear Sisters,  A little over a month ago Times Up was launched. You might have read a public letter in the New York Times. You may have noticed women wearing black on the red carpet. You might have seen women coming forward to share their stories of harassment. Maybe you identified with some of the stories these women shared. Maybe you found yourself nodding as you recalled similar moments in your own life. All over the world, women have been organising, resisting and speaking out  from Ni Una Ms in Latin America and the #lifeinleggings movement in the Caribbean, to the Balance Ton Porc movement in France and the #EverydaySexism hashtag in the UK. You might have seen #MeToo. You may have said: Me too.   Related: Actors and activists join forces on Bafta red carpet to call time on sexism    In autumn of last year, when stories came out in the press about sexual harassment, discrimination and abuse in the entertainment industry, 700,000 female farm workers wrote to us to say they stood with us in solidarity. Their letter explained that they knew what we were going through, that they stood shoulder to shoulder with us in our pain and in our belief that a better world was possible. This solidarity between women  activists and survivors  across all industries is what inspired Times Up and what continues to galvanise us. This movement is bigger than just a change in our industry alone. This movement is intersectional, with conversations across race, class, community, ability and work environment, to talk about the imbalance of power. Here in the UK, this movement is at a critical juncture. The gender pay gap for women in their 20s is now five times greater than it was six years ago. Research in the UK has found that more than half of all women said they have experienced sexual harassment at work. A growing reliance on freelance work forces creates power relationships which are conducive to harassment and abuse. Those engaged in insecure contract work are especially vulnerable to exploitation. While we know women are disproportionately affected by this abuse, we also know there are men in our industry and others that have been subjected to harassment and abuse as part of this system of patriarchal power. And they too have been silenced. So, what is our industrys role in promoting a vision of an equal society? We believe it is huge. We believe we need to use our power as communicators and connectors to shift the way society sees and treats us. We need to examine the kind of womenhood our industry promotes and sells to the world. There is no question that Times Up should be and will be a global movement. A movement that is defined and led by those affected by the problem, not by those in power. As we approach the Baftas  our industrys time for celebration and acknowledgment, we hope we can celebrate this tremendous moment of solidarity and unity across borders by coming together and making this movement international. Perhaps Times Up seems a million miles away to you  started by a group of women with privilege. The truth is, we are all workers, and whether were in the limelight or in the shadows, our voices matter. With our collective power, we can galvanize others. In the very near past, we lived in a world where sexual harassment was an uncomfortable joke; an unavoidable, awkward part of being a girl or a women. It was certainly not to be discussed, let alone addressed. In 2018, we seem to have woken up in a world ripe for change. If we truly embrace this moment, a line in the sand will turn to stone. This moment has already raised a staggering $21m for an American Times Up legal defence fund. But women all over the world need support and funding in order to be able to fight injustice. The revolution we want and need cannot happen without this resourcing. So, we invite you to join us in donating to the new UK justice and equality fund, to spread the word to others and be a catalyst for change. Everyone can make a difference by using your platform, your voice and your power as a changemaker. Finally, we are talking to each other, talking to our employers, our unions, our male allies and challenging our perpetrators and their enablers. Where there was isolation and silence in the film industry there is now connection and voice. Where there was internalisation and self-blame, there is now self-analysis and interrogation. We are connecting and partnering with our fellow workers, women and men, in a truly transformational way. Such unity has been inspirational for all of us. We want you to be part of this. If you have said times up, if the stories you have read in the papers have resonated and distressed you  join us in shifting the dial. Lets make 2018 the year that time was up on sexual harassment and abuse. This is your moment too. Abi Morgan, Ade Rawcliffe, Alice Eve, Alison Owen, Amanda Posey, Amber Rose Revah, Amma Asante, Amy Morgan, Andrea Gibb, Andrea Riseborough, Anna Duffield, Anne Morrison, Audrey Gagneux, Barbara Broccoli OBE, Beatie Edney, Brett Tyne, Bryony Hannah, Caitriona Balfe, Camille Gatin, Cara Horgan, Cara McKenzie, Carey Mulligan, Caroline Levy, Chanya Button, Charlotte Colbert, Charlotte Riley, Charlotte Ritchie, Ciara Barry, Claire Foy, Clmence Posy, Coky Giedroyc, Denise Gough, Edith Bowman, Eleanor Tomlinson, Elhum Shakerifar, Eliza Burrows McGill, Elizabeth Georgiou, Elizabeth Karlsen, Elizabeth McGovern, Ella Purnell, Ella Smith, Emerald Fennell, Emilia Clarke, Emily Berrington, Emily Leo, Emma Pegram, Emma Thompson, Emma Watson, Eva Yates, Faye Marsay, Faye Ward, Felicity Jones, Finola Dwyer ONZM, Florence Pugh, Freema Agyeman, Gemma Arterton, Gemma Chan, Gilly Tompkins, Gugu Mbatha-Raw MBE, Gwendoline Christie, Hannah Arterton, Harriet Spencer, Dame Harriet Walter, Hayley Atwell, Hayley Squires, Hope Dickson Leach, Imogen Poots, Isabelle Sieb, Ivana MacKinnon, Ivana Primorac, Jackie Okwera, Jacquie Drewe, Jan Asante, Janette Davidson, Jany Temime, Jaya Campbell, Jenne Casarotto, Jessica Ashworth, Jessica Brown Findlay, Jessica Drake, Jessica Levick, Jessica Malik, Jessica Parker, Jessica Raine, Jessica Swale, Jessie Buckley, Jill McCullough, Jill Taylor, Joanna Natasegara, Jodie Whittaker, Joely Richardson, Jojo Moyes, Josie Rourke, Juliet Nicholson, Kate Hardie, Kate Herron, Kate Kinninmont MBE, Kate Muir, Kate Wilson, Kate Winslet, Katie Leung, Katie Sinclair, Katy McPhee, Keira Knightley, Kim Tserkezie, Kirstie Swain, Kitty Kaletsky, Laura Carmichael, Leanne Davis, Letitia Wright, Libby Durdy, Lily Cole, Lily James, Lindy King, Line Langebek, Liz Gill, Liza Marshall, Lorna Mann, Lucy Bevan, Lucy Fairney, Lydia Wilson, Lyndsey Pugh, Lynsey Muir, Mahalia Belo, Manon Ardisson, Massy Tadjedin, Mia Bays and the board of Birds Eye View, Miranda Hart, Nadya Jary, Nana Hughes, Naomi Donne, Naomie Harris, Natasha Dack, Nathalie Emmanuel, Nicky Bentham, Nicola Pearcey, Nicola Walker, Nina Gold, Nira Park, Noma Dumezweni, Noomi Rapace, Olivia Colman, Olivia Poulet, Olivia Williams, Ophelia Lovibond, Pandora Colin, Pearl Mackie, Phoebe Billington, Phoebe Fox, Pippa Beng, Dame Pippa Harris, Polly Kemp, Poppy Delevingne, Rachel Tunnard, Rebecca Hall, Rebecca OBrien, Rebekah Staton, Rebekah Wray-Rogers, Rebel Wilson, Rosalind Johnson, Rosamund Pike, Rosie Crerar, Rowan Woods, Ruth Greenberg, Ruth Wilson, Saffron Burrows, Sally El Hosaini, Sally Long-Innes, Samantha Barks, Samantha Morton, Saoirse Ronan, Sara Smith, Sarah Brocklehurst, Sarah Gavron, Sarah Jane Wright, Sarah Solemani, Sarah Stephenson, Sheila Atim, Sienna Miller, Sofe Goodwin, Sophie Okonedo OBE, Suzanne Bertish, Sylvia Parker, Tallulah Fairfax, Tamsin Greig, Thandie Newton, Tess Morris, Tessa Ross, Tessa Thompson, Thea Paulett, Thea Sharrock, Tilly Coulson, Tina Gharavi, Tori Parry, Tracey Seaward, Tuppence Middleton, Vanessa Jones, Vanessa Kirby, Vicky Jewson, Vicky McClure, Wendy Wats, Yero Timi-Biu, Zawe Ashton   Amended 23 February 2018 to correct the spelling of Ni Una Ms.     Phyll Opoku-Gyimah, co-founder, trustee and executive director of UK Black Pride. Photograph: Alamy    Activists letter:  Dear Sisters,  We write today as activists, organisers, advocates and campaigners working to end violence against women and girls. We work in rape crisis centres, specialist black and minority ethnic women organisations, disabled women organisations, refuges, helplines, advice services, women infrastructure organisations, community organisations, women campaigning groups, universities, trade unions, women networks and more. We write to you as a diverse group of women, speaking to other women, about the world that we live in, and the one that we know it is possible to create. In the last few months we have heard a number of women speak out about their experiences of being harassed, assaulted, abused and victimised in the entertainment industry. Over and over again, we have heard stories of powerful individuals, primarily men, who have abused their positions to control women, to violate their bodies, to cause emotional harm and to threaten their livelihoods. We know that many women have also been silenced in a myriad of ways, which include being threatened with further abuse, public shaming, not being able to work and not being believed. For those of us who do this work, these stories are all too familiar. We bear witness each day to the ways that adult women, young women and girls are subjected to violence in every sphere, from the home to the workplace. We know that many women are subjected to abuse, which is not only about sex and gender, but also about factors such as race, ethnicity, sexuality, class, disability, age and more; and we know that this compounds the marginalisation that women have to face. We recognise that the ways in which women in the entertainment industry have been silenced mirror the ways that women are silenced by individual perpetrators, by companies, by families, by institutions, by communities and by the state. For each women in the entertainment industry who has spoken out, there are thousands of women whose stories go unheard. One in 10 women in the European Union report having experienced cyber-harassment since the age of 15 and close to one in three 16-18-year-old girls say they have experienced unwanted sexual touching at school. One in five women in England and Wales have experienced some type of sexual assault since the age of 16. The number of rapes recorded by police in England and Wales is the highest in the EU, according to official 2017 figures. On average two women are killed by their partner or ex-partner every week in England and Wales. This needs to end. These are not isolated incidents. This is about power and inequality; and it is systemic. We know that as we write about our experiences some will ask us: But what about the men? While our work is focused on women and girls, we acknowledge all survivors of abuse. We recognise their experiences as part of a wider system of patriarchal power which disproportionately impacts women and girls and also harms men and boys. We join with all survivors to demand change. If this change is to happen, we need a major shift across our societies. This shift needs to be intersectional and it needs to attend to all structural inequality and oppressions. As activists, we welcome the call from our entertainment industry sisters to unite to call TIME on harassment and abuse. We recognise that every women, everywhere, who has ever spoken out has been part of creating change, even when she has not been believed. We know that these conversations are not new, and that these stories are not exceptional, but the women in the entertainment industry that have spoken out have helped to push issues such as sexual harassment and rape into the public consciousness in an unprecedented way. We believe that this is a moment in time when we can harness our collective energies to dismantle the wall of silence that surrounds violence against women and girls. To every women afraid to walk down the streets, or take public transport, we see you. To every women scared to go home or who is trapped at home, we hear you. To every girl and every young women who is terrified of going to school, we are with you. To every women who has been detained, while seeking safety, we believe you. To each and every one of you, who has been subjected to any form of harassment, abuse and/or victimisation, we say this: we hear you. We see you. We believe you. We are with you. We believe that it is possible to create a different world; one that is equal and just. We believe that it is possible for us to have freedom and safety wherever we are, from our homes to our workplaces. So today we come together with sisters in the entertainment industry to call Times UP on sexual abuse, and other forms of abuse, harassment and victimisation. We call on you to join us in this movement and support our work. Organisations and groups working to create systemic and long-term change in the UK are in desperate need of resourcing. A 2013 survey of European charitable foundations showed less than 5% of funds were targeted towards women. It should therefore come as no surprise that many of the organisations that have been fighting for justice and equality are chronically underfunded. As government cuts and austerity measures take their grip on our sector, many of the services that are supporting survivors are struggling to stay open. Please contact us to find out how you can make a difference, and consider donating to Rosas justice and equality fund today. Signed: Adeola Iluyomade, Rape Crisis, Adwoa Kwateng-Kluvitse, Forward, Akeela Ahmed, activist, Alison Hill, Rape Crisis, Amna Abdullatif, Amrit Wilson, author and activist, Anber Raz, Imkaan Andrea Simon, End Violence Against Women Coalition, Angela Maruli, Forward, Angelina Rodriques, End Violence Against Women Coalition, Arabella Gayle, student and activist, Aviah Sarah, Sisters Uncut, Baljit Banga, London Black women Project, Beverley Williams, Amadudu Camille Kumar, Women and Girls Network, Caroline Burton, Rape Crisis, Caroline Vaux, Rape Crisis, Carys Afoko, Level Up Cas Heron, Rape Crisis, Ceri Hayes, Gender Matters, Charlotte Kneer, women Aid survivor ambassador, Reigate and Banstead women Aid, Chlo Winfield, women Aid survivor ambassador, Cimone Hilton, Safer London, Claire Throssell, women Aid child first campaigner and survivor ambassador, Clare Hyde, Astraea Project, Cris McCurley, solicitor, Darlene Corry, researcher and activist, Dawn Redshaw, Salford women Aid, Dawn Thomas, Rape Crisis, Diana Nammi, Iranian and Kurdish women Rights Organisation (IKWRO), Dianne Whitfield, Rape Crisis, Dion Spence, Imkaan Dionne Nelson, women Resource Centre, Dorett Jones, Imkaan, Dr Akima Thomas, Women and Girls Network, Dr Ava Kanyeredzi, University of East London, Dr Carlene Firmin MBE, University of Bedfordshire, Dr Fiona Vera Gray, Durham University, Dr Kate Cook, Manchester Metropolitan University, Dr Lisa W Kelly, University of Glasgow, Dr Maria Garner, Dr Marianna Tortell, Domestic Violence Intervention Project (DVIP), Dr Marsha Scott, Scottish women Aid, Dr Nancy Lombard, Glasgow Caledonian University, Dr Nicola Sharp-Jeffs, London Metropolitan University, Dr Ravi K Thiara, University of Warwick, Dr Sue Robson, women Rights advocate, Dr Susan Berridge, University of Stirling, Dr Rebecca Johnson, Women in Black, Ehinor Otaigbe, Wonderfully Made women, Elaine Peaker, Rape Crisis, Eleanor Lisney, Sisters of Frida, Elizabeth Ackerley, activist, Emma Ritch, Engender, Estelle Du Boulay, Rights of Women, Esua Goldsmith, writer and activist, Fiona Davidson, journalist and trade unionist, Firoza Mohmed, Humraaz Foloshade Alonge, The Butterflies Francesca Jarvis, Rape Crisis, Garima Jhamb, women Aid, Georgina Robb, Women and Girls Network, Guddy Helevuo-Burnet, Domestic Abuse Housing Alliance (DAHA), Gurpreet Virdee, Women and Girls Network, Hannana Siddiqui, Helen Cylwik, consultant, Hilary McCollum, writer and campaigner, Huda Jawad, Standing Together Against Domestic Violence, Ikamara Larasi, activist, Ila Patel, Asha Projects, Illary Valenzuela Oblitas, Latin American women Rights Service (LAWRS), Indira Purushothaman, Imkaan, Jackie Hancox, Rape Crisis Jan Melia, women Aid Federation Northern Ireland, Janet McDermott, women Aid, Jashmin Patel, Imkaan, Jayne Bullough, Rape Crisis Jennifer Edmunds, Sisters Uncut, Jo Costello, Every Day Victim Blaming, Jo Sutcliffe, Rape Crisis, Jo Todd, Respect, Jocelyn Watson, activist and writer, Jodie Woodward, Rape Crisis, Kafayat Okanlawon, Imkaan, Karen Boyle, University of Strathclyde, Karen Moore, Astraea Project, Kathleen Moss, ACMA, Katie Ghose, women Aid, Katie Russell, Rape Crisis, Kim Donahue, consultant Laura Bates, Everyday Sexism Project, Leah Cowan, Imkaan, Lee Eggleston, Rape Crisis, Lesley Painter, Rape Crisis, Lia Latchford, Imkaan, Lisa Johnson, women Aid, Lisa-Marie Taylor, FiLiA, Louise Harcourt, Women and Girls Network, Louise Whitfield, public law specialist, Lynne Wham, Rape Crisis, Maggie Parks, women Rape and Sexual Abuse Centre, Cornwall, Mandy Thomas, women Aid Survivor ambassador, Marai Larasi MBE, Imkaan, Marchu Girma, Women for Refugee Women, Marie-Claire Faray, Common Cause Platform for Congolese Women, Mary Mason, Solace women Aid, Mary Otuko, Forward, Michelle Springer Benjamin, Women and Girls Network, Molly Ackhurst, Rape Crisis Tebussum Rashid, Sukoon Ltd, Naana Otoo-Oyortey, Forward, Nahir de la Silva, Latin American women Rights Service (LAWRS), Natalia Dawkins MBE, Natasha Walter, Women for Refugee Women, Neha Kagal, Imkaan, Nicki Norman, women Aid, Nicole Jacobs, Standing Together, Nina George, Nina Kelly, activist and consultant, Olu Amokeodo, Rape Crisis, Phyll Opoku-Gyimah, UK.Black Pride, Pragna Patel, Southall Black Sisters, Professor Aisha Gill, University of Roehampton, Professor Clare McGlynn, Durham University, Professor Liz Kelly, London Metropolitan University, Professor Nicole Westmarland, Durham University, Quinn, Rape Crisis, Rachel Krys, End Violence Against Women Coalition, Raggi Kotak, 1 Pump Court, Rahni Binjie, Imkaan, Ranjit Kaur, campaigner, Rebecca Hitchen, Rape Crisis, Rosa Knight, Rape and Sexual Abuse Support Centre, Rose Ssali, Support and Action women Network (SAWN), Roz Hardie, Lewisham Disability Coalition, Rupa Sarkar, women Resource Centre, Ruth Atkinson, Imkaan, Sabrina Qureshi, Million Women Rise, Sadi Khan, women Aid Survivor ambassador, Sally Jackson, Standing Together Against Domestic Violence, Sandie Barton, Rape Crisis, Scotland, Sandy Brindley, Rape Crisis, Scotland, Sara Kirkpatrick, Respect, Sarah Green, End Violence Against Women Coalition, Shaista Aziz, Shaista Gohir OBE, Muslim women Network, UK, Shamshia Ali, Sheila Coates, Rape Crisis, Shelley Johnson, Rape Crisis, Sumanta Roy, Imkaan, Susan Berridge, University of Stirling, Susie McDonald, Tender, Taranjit Chana, London Black women Project, Toks Okeniyi, Forward, Tracey Ford, JAGS Foundation, Umme Imam, Angelou Centre, Verity Meeson, Women and Girls Network, Vivienne Hayes MBE, women Resource Centre, Yenny Aude, Latin American women Aid, Zahra Rasouli, Women and Girls Network, Zlahka Ahmed, Apna Haq Zoe Gray, Women and Girls Network"
"67""Alain Mabanckou, the acclaimed Congolese writer, has rejected Emmanuel Macrons project to boost French speaking worldwide, calling instead for a complete overhaul of the club of French-speaking countries known as la Francophonie, which he said had become an instrument of French imperialism propping up African dictators. The institutional network of French-speaking countries cannot continue as it is today because it goes against everything we ever dreamed of, Mabanckou told the Guardian in Nantes, where he was artistic director of the Atlantide world literary festival this weekend. It is not  and it has never been  the great common melting pot that would ensure cultural freedom and courteous exchange. Today it is one of the last instruments that allows France to say it can still dominate the world, still have a hold over its former colonies. The award-winning novelist, 51, is hailed as one of the worlds best writers in French  winner of Frances top Renaudot literary prize and a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. On Martin Luther King Day, Mabanckou published an open letter to Emmanuel Macron, refusing to work on the French presidents new plans to boost the French-speaking world. Since then, other writers and have joined him in criticising what they describe as Frances imperialist and out-of-touch approach. The French president has promised a project next month to reinvigorate the Francophonie, the official grouping of more than 50 countries  from Senegal to Canada via Belgium, Madagascar and Mauritius  where French is an official or significant language. When Macron announced in a speech to students in Burkina Faso in November that French could be the number one language in Africa and maybe even the world within decades and that it fell to young Africans to defend it, he underestimated the cultural row that would ensue.  French is the sixth most spoken language in the world  after Mandarin Chinese, English, Hindi, Spanish and Arabic  and there are now more French speakers outside France than inside it. With population growth, there will be more than 700 million French speakers by 2050, 80% of them in Africa. Macron, 40, who was born long after most French colonies became independent in the 1960s, presents himself as turning his back on the old system known as franafrique  in which kickbacks, petrodollars and privileged relations defined Pariss foreign policy towards its former colonies in Africa. He has appointed as his personal representative to the grouping of French-speaking countries the award-winning French-Moroccan novelist Lela Slimani. But there has been a backlash against Macron from global French-language writers, after Mabanckou accused him of failing to go far enough in transforming the official group of French-speaking countries. They say Macron should tear down and totally reinvent the cosy institutional club. Mabanckou, who has French and Congolese citizenship, said the networks international summits allowed French leaders to have quiet meetings with African dictators and be uselessly complicit with despots. You cant talk about the French-speaking world if you dont ask the question of democracy in Africa, he said. Theres an incongruity in wanting to talk about defending the French language and then holding summits when were still in dictatorships in countries that speak French. And today, there are more countries that are dictatorships in the French-speaking world than the English-speaking world.  Civil society groups in countries like Chad, Congo-Brazzaville, Gabon, Guinea and Togo have warned against the trampling of democratic rights.  Mabanckou argued that the world club of French-speaking countries was still defined by France, from a diplomatic point of view as a continuation of hazy, old foreign policy ideas, a way of sustaining French imperialism.   Related: Macron to visit Corsica as demands for greater autonomy gain weight     He also spoke of a damaging literary divide that had not been bridged. He lamented that while English-language literature had embraced its global diversity, France had been slow to do so. In some commercial bookshops in France, key French-language writers, even with joint French nationality, were being placed on foreign literature shelves. He regretted what he called the Paris hierarchys tendency to look down on global French-language writers, set them apart and consider them as authors who write with an accent. Today Hanif Kureishi is as valid as any other writer in English, Mabanckou said. But in France were still at that delicate distinction in literature. In other words, discrimination is not just social, its also literary.  Mabanckou said it was a lost opportunity that global French-language literature was currently not taught on the national curriculum in French schools and yet it was thriving at US universities and widely translated into English, such as the work of the acclaimed late Ivory Coast novelist Ahmadou Kourouma or the French-Lebanese Amin Maalouf.   He felt the challenges to the institutional club of French-speaking countries were part of an end of an epoque mood, where all institutions that serve as a reminder of colonial domination were being questioned, including the CFA franc  a currency pegged to the euro used in 14 African countries, which some have criticised for being a relic of colonialism.  For Mabanckou the solution would be to create a new partnership in the French-speaking world led by civil society, writers and artists that did more to protect local African languages, was more supportive of freedom of travel and breaking down borders. In his opening speech at the Atlantide festival, he talked of a French-speaking world where no one would be seen as foreign or need a visa.  Slimani insisted at a convention on the French-speaking world in Paris last week that she wanted to modernise global French, open up the language with real objectives in terms of human rights, gender equality and the defence of democracy."
"68""Top story: PM veers this way and that  Good morning, its Graham Russell here at the start of the week with a round-up of whats going on. Theresa May appears to have been forced into hardening her Brexit plans with a ruling from Downing Street that the UK will not be in a customs union with the EU. Providing some sense of clarity (at least for now), an official source said: It is not our policy to be in the customs union, preferring instead a customs arrangement that frees Britain to strike trade deals with non-EU countries.  Just days earlier, May had refused to rule out staying in a customs union when questioned during her China visit. On Friday, senior Tory sources told the Guardian the prime minister initially appeared to be swayed by the Treasurys proposals for a permanent customs membership but had since backed away from them. The move sets the tone for a crucial week for the prime minister, with the EUs chief negotiator meeting David Davis today for talks on the transitional arrangements. On Wednesday, key cabinet colleagues will meet to decide the fine print on a customs policy. Yesterday, the home secretary, Amber Rudd, and the housing minister, Dominic Raab, still appeared to be at odds on the issue.  Matthew dAncona writes that a reckoning is long past due and that May must go, given her role in making the UK an international joke, at risk of being taken to the cleaners by the EU or left with no deal at all. Can we go back and change Brexit? No, but Labour peer Andrew Adonis has urged people to be be optimistic, be confident during his national tour aimed at pursuing a second referendum. * * * Crisis becomes critical  Dozens of urgent operations have been cancelled against the orders of NHS bosses, affecting patients with cancer, heart disease and other life-threatening illnesses. Hospitals said the limited supply of intensive care beds has forced them to prioritise flu patients at risk of dying before surgery. Rachel Power, the chief executive of the Patients Association, said the move to cancel surgery for life-threatening conditions suggests the NHS may be in worse trouble than wed thought. Separately, thousands of smear tests in Essex are being reviewed after problems were discovered with the laboratory procedure. So far, 900 samples have been reviewed, with 17 women requiring further assessment. * * * Hate campaign  A Holocaust-denying neo-Nazi is set to become the Republican nominee for a seat in Illinois. Candidate Art Jones has been seeking office for more than 40 years and in 2016 was taken off the ballot in the same district, reportedly after none of the voter signatures he needed to qualify were found to be valid. Jones recently spoke of regretting voting for Donald Trump who has surrounded himself with hordes of Jews. The chairman of the states Republican party said it strongly opposed Joness racist views.  * * * Sting in the tail  Just in case you thought winter was done, the Met has warned people to brace for one of the coldest weeks of the season, with many places expecting at least a dusting of snow. Temperatures could sink as low as -7C in some parts of the UK, while the bulk of the population can expect sub-zero temperatures. The cold snap is expected to continue until at least next weekend, with a chance milder weather might not arrive until the middle of the following week. * * * Other corridors of power  Two Freemasons lodges set up for politicians and journalists are operating in Westminster, the secretive organisations records show. New Welcome Lodge recruits MPs, peers and parliamentary staff, and Gallery Lodge is for the press. A third  the Alfred Robbins Lodge  was also set up for journalists and meets regularly in London. The chief executive of United Grand Lodge of England, David Staples, said there was no conflict arising from the arrangement. Being a Freemason helps those members in roles serving society ... to be better in those jobs by encouraging them to act as better people themselves, he said. MPs and peers are not obliged to declare membership of the Freemasons. No political journalists have declared their membership. Here is a guide to the secret society. * * * Tongan skier  My goal was, whats my next big challenge? What is completely impossible, what cant be done? So says Pita Taufatofua, who has become Tongas first ever Olympic contender in cross-country skiing. The Pacific Islander hadnt seen snow until a couple of years ago and has been able to afford only one pair of skis and one knob of wax. * * * Lunchtime read: The fight that started all fights   s rights and equality in London in October 2012.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />   Labour MP Emily Thornberrys awakening began during her teenage years  via a BBC drama about the suffragettes  but progressed more through what she discovered at home. Her grandmother would have been a suffragette had Nan been born a bit earlier. Thornberry writes: Looking back I can see it makes perfect sense. Nan was a working-class East End girl who got a job in a bank in the early 30s doing all the backroom numerical calculations. But as soon as she got married, it wasnt just that she was expected to stay at home: in those days your employer automatically let you go. What Nan and Mum taught me is that the fight for female empowerment and equality was not won a century ago, and is still not won today, as we can see from the debates that have dominated the past year  from Harvey Weinstein to Carrie Gracie. But here is the key. Before women suffrage, the only way we could change the status quo was through pressure, whether applied politely in conversations with influential men, or violently with rocks thrown at their carriages. Gaining the vote gave us the power to make change happen ourselves. It was the fight that made all the other battles we have fought since then possible. We will therefore always be indebted to the women who made it happen. Sport    Nick Foles holds the Vince Lombardi trophy.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Philadelphia Eagles Nick Foles holds the Vince Lombardi trophy. Photograph: Kevin Lamarque/Reuters    The Philadelphia Eagles are Super Bowl champions after one of the NFLs most historically snakebitten clubs ended their 57-year championship drought in the most thrilling way imaginable, beating the New England Patriots 41-33 in Minneapolis. The half-time entertainment was slightly less thrilling, as Justin Timberlake gyrated through his vast array of hits and paid tribute to hometown hero Prince in a solid but uneventful show. This years game also brought with it a stack of new trailers teasing some of the years biggest films and shows. In the Six Nations, the most eye-catching performance of Englands ultimately predictable opening victory was that of the newest member of the side, Sam Simmonds. Meanwhile, the England women captain, Sarah Hunter, scored three tries as the defending champions defeated Italy 42-7 in their opener.  Jrgen Klopp said he would be hit with the biggest fine in world football for his true thoughts on Tottenham Hotspurs dramatic late equaliser at Anfield but insisted the match officials cost Liverpool a crucial victory in their pursuit of Champions League qualification. And Jos Mourinho has ruled out signing a forward next summer, believing he has assembled a Manchester United frontline capable of challenging for trophies.  Business Asian shares are being smashed this morning as investors take their lead from the big sell-off on Wall Street on Friday. The FTSE100 is set to catch the bug, too, with the index predicted to open more than 1% down this morning. And Lloyds Bank has banned its credit card customers from buying bitcoins as the cryptocurrency continues its slide. The pound is up slightly at $1.412 and 1.133. Our economics editor, Larry Elliott, says the current situation reminds him of 1987 when the world was on the bring of a market meltdown.  The papers Weve got a blend of health, wealth, Freemasons and a customs union today. The Guardian carries two exclusives  one on the Freemasons lodges operating in Westminster and the other on NHS hospitals cancelling urgent operations as the winter crisis bites. The picture slot is given to a women march marking the suffrage centenary.      The Telegraph says Lloyds has banned its 9 million credit card customers from buying bitcoins, fearing it could end up with a huge bill should the cryptocurrency fall even further. It gives Theresa Mays Brexit customs stance a small spot. The main picture is of Facebooks European head, Nicola Mendelsohn, who reveals she has an incurable form of cancer in the hope of raising awareness. The Mail says men are still too embarrassed to see the doctor for prostate cancer checks despite decades of campaigns to raise awareness of a disease that is a bigger killer than breast cancer. It also carries an interview with Pamela Anderson about the menopause.  The Times says plans are afoot to heal the Tory rift over a post-Brexit customs union, with a transitional compromise being mooted. (Some say that might drive a wedge twixt Boris Johnson and Michael Gove.) Its second story says Russian billionaires have been asking Vladimir Putin if they can return home without being arrested as a UK crackdown on unexplained wealth continues apace. The FT casts its interview with Bank of England deputy governor Sam Woods in the light of the customs row. Woods warns against a bonfire of the banking regulations after Brexit.  The Express and Mirror point to the current winter chill, and the Sun says some of the Queens swans have succumbed to bird flu. For more news: www.theguardian.com Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here."
"69""Thousands of people joined a march in central London calling for gender equality and to celebrate the 100th anniversary of women getting the vote.  The event, organised by the charity Care, was the sixth annual #March4Women, which is held each year on or near International women Day on 8 March.  Organisers promised an uplifting and inspiring march, which aimed to shine a spotlight on the inequality women and girls face worldwide.  Politicians from different parties, as well as groups representing all religions stood shoulder to shoulder as they marched on the same historic route taken by the suffragettes last century. Banners reading Lets finish what the suffragettes started and Close the pay gap were held aloft during the rally in Trafalgar Square, which followed the march. Speeches were made by the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, and activists Bianca Jagger, Helen Pankhurst, Shola Mos-Shogbamimu and Faeeza Vaid, with a video address by the singer Annie Lennox. Sandi Toksvig, the broadcaster and co-founder of the women Equality party, also appeared. Ahead of the march she said: Weve been marching for 100 years. Nows the time to put our foot down.   s Day\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  The March4Women march in central London to celebrate International women Day. Photograph: Ray Tang/Rex/Shutterstock    Leading the march was Pankhurst, the great-granddaughter of suffragette Emmeline Pankhurst, who said right across the board in every sphere theres work to be done to ensure gender equality.  She said there was a great energy and that day after day after day theres a media story saying we are not going to tolerate this any more.  Khan donned a deeds not words sash and said he was a proud feminist. He said there were too few women in parliament and boardrooms across the country, adding that a 50% gender balance should be a floor to aim towards, not a ceiling. I think if youre in a position of power and influence and you think its wrong that women get paid less than men, you think its wrong theres discrimination against women still, you think its wrong that simply by virtue of being born a boy you have more chances than a girl  you should be a feminist. He added: And I cant understand why anybody wouldnt want to be a proud feminist. The Labour MP Dawn Butler was met with a loud cheer when she said she was marching for women whose stories had been ignored or overlooked.  She said: Im marching for the hidden history. Im marching for the women nobody knows about. Im marching for the women nobody speaks about. Im marching for the women who suffer in silence. Im marching to say we hear you."
"70""Millions of women gathered across the world to strike, protest and party to mark International women Day on Thursday.  
Trains stopped in Spain as female workers went on the countrys first feminist strike, newspapers dropped their prices for women in France, and the IWD flag flew over the UK parliament.  
In India, women marched in several cities including Delhi, Karachi and Kolkata, and women also took to the streets in Bangladesh, Belarus, Nepal, Pristina and Ankara among many others.  
 
  Related: International Women's Day 2018: protests across the world as women push for progress  live  
 
It was a day of celebration and a day in which the message was spelt out that much work still needed to be done to achieve global gender equality.  
 
 s Day flag.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  MP Dawn Butler and the Speaker, John Bercow, with the International women Day flag. 
  Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
  
 
United Kingdom 
In London, an International women Day flag flew over parliament for the first time as MPs and peers marked the day with a debate in both Houses of parliament.  
The shadow equalities minister, Dawn Butler, said she had been inspired by the flag flying over the Transport for London building on Monday and had approached the Speaker, John Bercow, about a flag for parliament. He approved the plan with less than 24 hours to go, as the House commemorated 100 years since the first women in the UK got the vote.  
Bercow said: We must not sit smugly and think job done; there are still issues of unequal access to the labour market, occupational segregation, women and members of minority groups scaling the heights professionally, there is a substantial gender pay gap. 
More than 100 MPs and peers from all parties wrote to the home secretary, Amber Rudd, calling for women in Northern Ireland to be allowed access to abortion services locally rather than having to go to England. 
United Nations 
Women tweeted about the global #WikiGap event, organised in partnership with the Swedish foreign ministry. The idea was to get more women contributing to the Wikipedia website to address the gender imbalance on the worlds largest online and user-generated encyclopaedia. The Swedish foreign ministry said: Knowledge is power and Wikipedia has the potential to colour our view of the world. But there is great imbalance between men and women on the website, like in society at large. 
It said 90% of those who added content to Wikipedia were men and there were four times more articles about men than women. The figures vary regionally but, no matter how you look at it, the picture is clear: the information about women is less extensive than that about men. Regardless of which language version of Wikipedia you read. We want to change this. 
 
 
  On Int women Day, more than 50 countries organized #Wikipedia edit-a-thons in partnership with @SweMFA to make the internet more gender equal. UN Women in Georgia, Kosovo and @unwomenbih support the action to close the #Wikigap. #TimeIsNow #IWD2018 pic.twitter.com/6J9NkDlkGd UN Women Europe &amp;CIS (@unwomeneca) 
  March 8, 2018
  
 
Ireland 
Campaigners seeking to repeal the eighth amendment celebrated a historic and momentous step forward in their campaign to allow access to abortion. The wording of a national referendum to overturn the constitutional ban on abortion was agreed by the cabinet on Thursday.  
Ailbhe Smyth, convenor of the Coalition to Repeal the Eighth Amendment, welcomed the news as a significant milestone, adding: It has been a very long time coming ... We need abortion care that is safe and regulated, in line with best medical practice, and today brings us a crucial step forward in trying to achieve this important goal.  
Meanwhile, the former Irish president Mary McAleese said the Catholic church was an empire of misogyny, ahead of a conference in Rome calling for women to be given leadership roles by the Vatican. There are so few leadership roles currently available to women, McAleese said. Women do not have strong role models in the church they can look up to. [A church hierarchy] that is homophobic and anti-abortion is not the church of the future. 
Online 
Comedian Richard Herring continued his tradition of responding to Twitter users who ask when is there an International Mens Day? This year he used his tweets to raise money for the domestic violence charity Refuge, which supports women and girls.  
 
 
  Always best to have a guess rather than do any research. But you guessed wrong and must now pay 5 here - have 11 more guesses. Use them wisely. Richard K Herring (@Herring1967) 
  March 8, 2018
  
 
Australia 
In the outback town of Tennant Creek, Indigenous Australians women and girls marched to call for an end to alcohol-fuelled violence. 
Meanwhile, the Australian Council of Trade Unions used three billboards to demand paid domestic violence leave and an end to gender-based violence in the workplace. The 27th prime minister of Australia, Julia Gillard, gave a speech at the Royal women Hospital, in Melbourne, in which she said more work needed to be done to counteract unconscious bias against women. 
 
  
  
  South Korean women demonstrate in Seoul. 
  Photograph: Jung Yeon-Je/AFP/Getty Images 
  
 
South Korea 
Hundreds of South Koreans, many wearing black and holding black #MeToo signs, rallied in central Seoul. The movement has gained significant traction in the country since January when a female prosecutor began speaking openly about workplace mistreatment and sexual misconduct. 
Several high-profile South Korean men have resigned from positions of power, including a governor who was a leading presidential contender before he was accused of repeatedly raping his female secretary. 
On the eve of International women Day, protesters in Seoul gathered outside the Japanese embassy to highlight the plight of so-called comfort women  a euphemism for the 200,000 girls and young women who were forced to work in Japanese brothels before and during the second world war. 
France  
Demonstrators called for supporters, including men, to down tools in their workplaces at 15.40 in solidarity with their female colleagues. Research has shown women in France earn 24% less for the same work as their male colleagues, leading to calculations that they are working for free each day after 15.40pm. Members of the snat suspended their session at that time after Andr Chassaigne, a member of the Communist party, requested a brief halt in proceedings. 
The French prime minister, Edouard Philippe, presented 50 measures to promote equality and combat violence against women, resulting from a nationwide consultation, entitled the Equality Tour de France. They include an equal pay task force and fines for companies not offering the same remuneration to staff.  
 
 s Day rally at Obradoiro square in Santiago de Compostela, Spain.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  An International women Day rally at Obradoiro square in Santiago de Compostela, Spain. 
  Photograph: Lavandeira Jr/EPA 
  
 
Spain 
More than five million workers took part in the countrys first nationwide feminist strike, according to trade unions who said the unprecedented action was intended to highlight sexual discrimination, domestic violence and the wage gap. 
Huge crowds surged into streets and squares to call for change and equality in a demonstration coordinated by the 8 March Commission umbrella group which demanded an end to Spains enduring machista culture. It was supported by some of Spains best-known female politicians, including Madrids mayor, Manuela Carmena, and the mayor of Barcelona, Ada Colau. 
Under the slogan If we stop, the world stops, protesters congregated in cities including Madrid, Barcelona, Bilbao, Seville and Pamplona, to make their voices heard. The online Spanish newspaper eldiario.es marked the day by dotting its homepage with blocks of solid purple and the explanatory note: This is a space that would be filled with a story from one of our female reporters who are on strike. 
Spains transport ministry announced that 200 intercity trains out of 568 would not be operating, while 105 long-distance trains were cancelled. The underground in Madrid was also affected.  
 
  
  
  Protesters march towards the presidential palace in Manila. 
  Photograph: Bullit Marquez/AP 
  
 
Philippines 
Hundreds of activists in pink and purple shirts protested against Rodrigo Duterte, the countrys president, whom they claimed was among the worst violators of women rights in Asia. Protest leaders sang and danced in a boisterous rally in Manilas Plaza Miranda where they handed red and white roses to mothers, sisters and widows of several drug suspects slain under Dutertes deadly crackdown on illegal drugs. 
Aid sector 
More than 1,000 female aid workers from around the world signed an open letter calling for urgent reform across the humanitarian sector. The letter, addressed to the leaders of international charities, the UN and donors, urged organisations to treat allegations of sexual harassment and abuse as a priority. 
The aid sector is reeling from allegations that charities including Oxfam, Save the Children and the UN mishandled claims of sexual misconduct. The letter warned of the need for action rather than words. We are gravely concerned that the culture of silence, intimidation and abuse will continue as soon as the media spotlight on this issue begins to dim, said the signatories. We need effective leadership, commitment to action and access to resources. 
 
  
  
  Pakistani women rally in Karachi. 
  Photograph: Shahzaib Akber/EPA 
  
 
Pakistan 
At rallies in the capital, Islamabad, the largest city, Karachi, and the cultural capital, Lahore, women denounced violence against them in the country where yearly nearly 1,000 women are killed by close relatives in so-called honour killings. Pakistani women have largely been deprived of their rights since the country gained independence in 1947."
"71""Women at Channel 4 earn almost 30% less in average hourly pay than men working at the broadcaster, where two-thirds of the top 100 best paid staff are men. 
Alex Mahon, the companys female chief executive, who joined the company late last year, said: This number obviously makes for uncomfortable reading and I am determined to take action to address it. There is no quick fix, but identifying the complex and multiple reasons behind our gap is the first step towards tackling the fundamental issues at play.  
 
  
  
   
    What is being published?
    
    All companies and some public sector bodies in Great Britain, except Northern Ireland, with more than 250 employees had to&nbsp;report their gender pay gap to the Government Equalities Office for the first time by by 4 April 2018. The second year of gender pay gap reports&nbsp; - and the first indicator of how public bodies and companies are performing - must be filed by April 2019
    
    What is the gender pay gap?
    
    The gender pay gap is the difference between the average hourly earnings of men and women. The figure is expressed as a proportion of mens earnings. According to the ONS, the gap between what UK male and female workers earn  based on median hourly earnings for all workers&nbsp; -was 17.9% in April 2018, down from 18.4% in April 2017.
    
    Whats the difference between the mean and the median figures?
    
    Commonly known as the average, the mean is calculated by adding up the wages of all employees and dividing that figure by the number of employees. The mean gender pay gap is the difference between mean male pay and mean female pay.
    The median gap is the difference between the employee in the middle of the range of male wages and the employee in the middle of the range of female wages. Typically the median is the more representative figure, because the mean can be skewed by a handful of highly paid employees.
    
   
  
  
 
Channel 4 says its 28.6% mean average pay gap was down to men holding a higher proportion of senior positions, including in departments that attract higher average salaries overall. This factor accounts for close to half of our gender pay gap, its report said.  
 
  Related: Gender pay gap means women work 67 days a year for free, says TUC  
 
There are nearly twice as many women as men in lower paid roles at Channel 4. Overall women make up nearly 60% of the companys employees but 66% of the top 100 roles are held by men. 
The gender pay gap refers to the difference in average hourly earnings between all men and all women working for an organisation regardless of their roles, rather than men and women in the same role.  
All companies employing more than 250 people must file pay gap data under a government initiative which is highlighting the greater prevalence of men in highly paid roles. Women are generally more likely to hold the majority of lower paid roles in an organisation. 
Channel 4s mean pay gap, calculated by adding up the pay of all men and all women and dividing it by the number of employees of that gender, is higher than other media companies that have reported. Guardian News &amp; Media (GNM), owner of The Guardian, reported an 11.3% gap last week, which is similar to the BBC, where women earn an average of 10.7% less. The mean gap is 18% at Trinity Mirror, owner of the Daily Mirror, and 19.6% at ITN.  
 
  Related: Gender pay gap: what we learned in week three  
 
The median gap, which takes the mid-point when all wage rates are lined up from the biggest to smallest  reducing the impact of one-off outliers  is 24.2% at Channel 4; 12.1% at GNM; 9.3% at the BBC; 15% at Trinity Mirror and 18.2% at ITN.  
Channel 4 said it was aiming for a 50:50 gender balance among its top 100 earners by 2023. 
The company said: We have taken steps to increase the proportion of women in senior roles  for example, growing the proportion of female heads of department by 11% between March 2016 and March 2017 to reach 41% of total heads, but there is still further progress needed, most notably at the highest-paying levels. "
"72""The worlds top union official has said it is appalling that an Australian employer group has opposed a binding global convention against gender-based violence and harassment at work. Sharan Burrow, the International Trade Union Confederation general secretary, criticised the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, which in turn claims its position has been misinterpreted by the International Labour Organization. The ILO wants to stamp out violence and harassment against women and men in work, by developing an instrument which could mandate or encourage national laws such as paid domestic violence leave.   Related: One in 10 Australian women being sexually harassed at work, survey finds    According to a position paper it released on Wednesday, such a move is backed by 177 national union groups, 79 governments and 13 employer groups worldwide. The Australian government agreed to such an instrument but backed a non-binding recommendation rather than a binding convention. According to the ILO the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry  with employer groups in New Zealand, Korea, Japan and Austria  have expressed a preference for no instrument, but if the ILO pushes ahead, for the instrument to be non-binding. In comments that suggest the ILO misrepresented its position, the chamber of commerce chief executive James Pearson told Guardian Australia we have not said that there should not be an instrument.  We need to engage with employer and employee representatives, and governments, at the International Labour Conference to determine the best approach, he said. Burrow, the former Australian Council of Trade Unions president, told Guardian Australia more than 800 million women experience gendered violence, many of them in the workplace.    Violence at work is incredibly prevalent  employers do have a responsibility for safe workplaces  Sharan Burrow, International Trade Union Confederation     Making basic global rules about gendered violence is an important step to making a safer, freer world for working women, she said. It was appalling that employers would oppose measures to eliminate violence and harassment, which harm workplace productivity. Violence at work is incredibly prevalent  employers do have a responsibility for safe workplaces, she said. Beyond that they can also help ensure safe haven is possible ... by providing domestic violence leave - which is one of the central demands of the convention. Burrow said it was terrific that the #MeToo movement had provided a framework of security for women to speak out because silence [about abuse] can never be a condition of employment. Unfortunately there has been a worldwide wave of misogyny that has legitimated harassment violence from both authoritarian leaders in democracy and dictatorships. A convention would provide an international baseline that would help build a rights-based framework into labour laws to stop abuses that are not legislated [against] and prosecuted in many countries. Burrow said Australia had a good story to tell because four states had legislated for 10 days domestic violence leave in the public sector and many employers included it as a right in workplace deals. The Turnbull government opposes paid domestic violence leave, but both Labor and the Greens have promised to legislate to create the workplace right after the Fair Work Commission rejected a union push to include it in modern awards. Pearson said employers value their employees and want to provide working environments that are free from violence, discrimination and harassment. He said the chamber of commerce would play a lead role in the global discussion but the form of the instrument would be up for debate. In comments on the ILO proposal, the chamber of commerce and industry said employers responsibilities must be reasonable and in respect of things over which employers have actual control. Domestic violence is a community problem that can have spillover effects into the workplace and needs to be addressed, but care also needs to be taken to ensure that the responsibility of the state is not placed on the shoulders of employers, it said. It warned that rules requiring assessment of risks could prove very onerous for smaller enterprises and informal businesses."
"73""Canadas federal government has defended its decision to ask frontline employees to adopt gender-neutral language when interacting with the public, after the move was branded as ridiculous and mocked by opposition politicians. Earlier this year staff at Service Canada  the federal agency that connects Canadians to government services and benefits such as pension and employment insurance  were issued guidelines asking them to use gender-neutral or gender-inclusive language so as to avoid portraying a perceived bias towards a particular sex or gender. The directive, published this week by Radio Canada, offered the terms mother and father as examples of gender-specific language in contrast to the neutral term of parent. The use of honorifics such as Mr, Mrs or Ms can be seen/perceived as gender specific by a client, it noted, and instead encouraging employees to address people by full names or ask how they preferred to be addressed.  Reaction to the news was swift. LGBTQ group Egale Canada welcomed the move, with its executive director, Helen Kennedy, noting in an interview with the CBC that the task of accessing government programs can often be uncomfortable for those who dont fit into neat boxes. The federal New Democratic party also threw its support behind the idea. If we want to create a society where we respect everyone, leader Jagmeet Singh told reporters, we must give more consideration to individuals who are in minority positions who have experienced a lack of respect for years.  Other opposition politicians, however, took aim. Totally ridiculous, said Conservative MP Larry Miller. I have a mother and I have a father. Anybody out there, even if you were born through a surrogate you still have a mother and a father biologically  We all have a mother and a father.  Bloc Qubcois MP Louis Plamondon suggested the government was headed down a slippery slope. Should we stop talking about the black market? Should we ban that? Should we also ban the term whitewashing? This is all very philosophical, isnt it?    Related: Justin Trudeau apologises for 'dumb joke' after 'peoplekind' quote goes viral    Conservative leader Andrew Scheer linked the guidelines to Justin Trudeaus use of the term peoplekind at a town hall last month. He claimed it was a bad joke, Scheer told the House of Commons on Wednesday. Can the prime minister tell us why this bad joke has become a directive from his government? The directive comes amid a wider government push towards inclusivity. Last year the Liberal government joined more than half a dozen countries around the world in allowing its citizens to identify as gender X on their passports as well as passed legislation to better protect transgender Canadians from discrimination and violence. On Wednesday Jean-Yves Duclos, Canadas minister of families, children and social development, defended the guidelines, noting they had been drafted in response to public complaints. He stressed that Service Canada would continue to use Mr and Ms when interacting with clients. We are only confirming how people want to be addressed as a matter of respect, he wrote on Twitter. We are proud that Service Canada reflects the diversity of Canadas population and is working to adapt to the reality of 21st-century families. "
"74""Powerful vested interests within the Catholic church are being challenged at a conference in Rome on International women Day as calls grow for women to be given positions of authority and influence in the church. In a sign that a new assertive mood around women rights has reached the Vatican, the Voices of Faith gathering will on Thursday hear demands for bold steps towards gender equality within the male-dominated church. Meanwhile a manifesto of women for the church, which calls for women roles that are coherent with our competences and capacities, is circulating on social media. It says: As adult women we experience daily the subordinate role of women in the church. The rallying cry comes days after a magazine article exposed the exploitation of nuns at the Vatican. Headlined the (nearly) free work of nuns, the article revealed dire economic conditions experienced by many nuns, alongside resentment about the low value placed on their vocations compared with mens. Women in religious orders work long hours cooking, cleaning and serving the cardinals, bishops and officials who run the church, it claimed. With nominal or no pay, and no contracts of employment, the nuns are barely acknowledged by the men whose needs they provide for. Several nuns spoke anonymously to the magazine. In the eyes of Jesus we are all children of God, but in their concrete life some nuns do not live this, and they experience great confusion and discomfort, said one. Nuns were rarely invited to sit at the table they serve, she added. Only a handful of women hold senior positions in the Vatican hierarchy, including Barbara Jatta, who in 2016 became the first women to head its museums. The exploitation of nuns is likely to be raised at this weeks Rome conference, whose theme is Why Women Matter. In a statement, it organisers said: We live in times marked by change, but there are places where gender equality is being systematically overlooked. The Catholic church is one of them. The crises we must confront in our world today demand leaders, women and men, who are prepared to think the unthinkable and who will risk upsetting powerful vested interests and take bold steps forward for the greater good. In previous years, the annual conference has been held at the Vatican, but the organisers switched venues last month after the Holy See refused to give approval to Mary McAleese, a former president of Ireland, and two other speakers. No reasons were given, but McAleese has spoken in favour of women ordination, which has been ruled out by the pope, and LGBT rights. McAleese has declined to comment other than disclosing she had written to him about the refusal. Chantal Gtz, the founder of Voices of Faith, told the National Catholic Reporter: It is crucial for us to bring voices that represent perspectives often not heard at the Vatican. She added, as a non-Vatican entity: Ultimately, we did not see a reason why these women should have to go through an approval process by anyone. On the decision to relocate the conference, she said: We feel that the authentic voices of all the women we are bringing this year are more important than whether our event takes place at the Casina Pio IV or at the Jesuit Aula  what matters is that everyone in Rome and at the Vatican can easily come to listen. The pope has been invited to the conference, along with several cardinals. During an audience two years ago, he was asked directly whether the church could be more open to receiving the genius of women. He replied: It is true that women are excluded from decision-making processes in the church: not excluded, but the presence of women is very weak there, in decision-making processes. We must move forward. He also warned women in religious orders against drudgery, saying: Your work, my work and the work of all of us, is one of service. Very often I find consecrated women who perform a labour of servitude and not of service. When nuns were asked to perform work that was more servitude than service, have the courage to say no, he added."
"75""It is astonishing that, in 2018, girls&#xa0;still grow up being treated very differently from boys through&#xa0;entrenched stereotyping and unconscious biases. Girls subject choices in school are one&#xa0;clear symptom of their unequal&#xa0;experiences. One example is that four times as many boys as girls take physics, a subject seen as having value by universities and employers alike. As a society we have become inured to such disparities in choices and also to the&#xa0;deeper malaise it reveals. Gendered stereotypes are pervasive in our culture  ingrained by long-standing biases (both conscious and unconscious). They affect all of our expectations and, at an early age, those of our youngsters. Many of the stereotypes relate to different expectations of boys and girls. Why does this matter? First, we are losing talent. We need many more good engineers, scientists and programmers. Second, there is a personal cost for young women as we limit their expectations. There is no evidence to suggest any inherent differences between genders in either aptitude or interest in the sciences. On the contrary, our recent #iamaphysicist hashtag highlighted the variety, skill and joy&#xa0;of many young women physicists&#xa0;in rewarding careers. We know it is possible to effect change. The Institute of Physics has run a pilot in schools in which staff identified and addressed any bias or stereotyping. The pilot schools showed a threefold increase in girls choosing physics A-level, as well as broader positive change for all. We all have a role to play  government, educators, industry,&#xa0;parents and citizens  in tackling the barriers that girls face. On International women Day on 8 March, lets each consider what change we can make.Professor Julia HigginsPresident of the Institute of Physics  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"76""Not many first-year university students have to juggle late-night essay crises with the pressures of addressing delegates at Davos. For Malala Yousafzai, the hardest thing about starting at Oxford has been working out how much time to spend campaigning for girls education globally and how much to devote to her&#xa0;own&#xa0;education. As everyone around her seems to be in a&#xa0;permanent state of alarm about the amount of work they must do, her own battle to squeeze everything in feels bearable. Sometimes, it is challenging. You have to stay awake until late and finish your work; you have to ask to extend your deadline; you have to work a&#xa0;bit harder, she says in a&#xa0;phone call between classes. Everyone struggles. Everyone is panicking with their reading. It is hard to do all the reading and finish a 2,000-word essay&#xa0; it is normal for everyone to&#xa0;struggle. Before she arrived, she worried that her unique position as a Nobel prize-winning fresher might make it difficult to fit in. I&#xa0;was nervous, I&#xa0;was actually scared wondering how people would react. How would I&#xa0;make friends? How would people perceive me? But I&#xa0;was welcomed as a&#xa0;student. Its my second term now, Ive made so many friends, she says. She has an endearingly breezy way of brushing away the extraordinariness of her situation and modestly suggests that her challenges are pretty much those faced by most students (although this term, as well as the trip to Davos, she has been finalising a partnership with Apple to allow her Malala Fund to extend grants for secondary education to more than 100,000 girls  and she has been promoting a new book). I just feel like an Oxford student; I feel so grateful.     David Letterman with Malala Yousafzai. Photograph: Michele K Short/Netflix    Yousafzai, 20, is studying politics, philosophy and economics (PPE) at Lady Margaret Hall, and recently allowed the US chatshow host David Letterman to follow her around for a&#xa0;day, giving a&#xa0;snapshot of her life (taking him on a&#xa0;rapid tour of the college canteen and gardens, politely smiling at his jokes and halfheartedly playing table football with him); the footage is now available on Netflix, as part of the My Next Guest Needs No&#xa0;Introduction&#xa0;series. She has joined the Oxford Union, the Pakistan society and a&#xa0;cricket team, but is steering clear of student politics and has revised her ambition to follow in the footsteps of Benazir Bhutto (who also studied PPE at the same college) to become prime minister of Pakistan. I&#xa0;wanted to be prime minister when I&#xa0;was younger, when I&#xa0;was 11, because I&#xa0;thought that by becoming prime minister I&#xa0;could fix everything. But now that I&#xa0;have met so many presidents and prime ministers around the world, it just seems that things are not simple and there are other ways that I&#xa0;can bring the change that I&#xa0;want to see, she&#xa0;says. I think we have a lot of time to join politics in Pakistan  so, right now, I am not thinking about that, I have no plans. It is five-and-a-half years since Malala was shot in the head by a&#xa0;gunman who disliked her campaign against the Talibans ban on female education in Pakistans Swat valley, where she lived. She was flown to Birmingham for treatment and has lived in the UK since, gradually revising her perceptions about a&#xa0;country she now sees with all its&#xa0;flaws. She was surprised and shocked, she says, to discover how far Britain is from having gender equality; as a child, she had assumed that equal access to education here would mean there was a wider equality. The western world is viewed as an ideal for other countries, especially developing countries, in terms of development, progress and gender equality. There are things I have seen here which I&#xa0;value and appreciate: no girl is told not to go to school because she is a&#xa0;girl, you dont see women told to stay in houses and to cover their whole face and their whole body, and not go to market. But there is still a&#xa0;lot of work to be done on the representation of women in parliament, or if you look at the equal pay issue, or the sexual harassment issue, there are so many issues that the UK still needs to fight against to achieve&#xa0;equality.   Related: Our trip to Davos gave us proof of footballs power to change the world    She hasnt personally encountered racism or sexism, but is annoyed at how the media depicts women here. If you look at how women are portrayed in movies, films or ads, they are viewed as these delicate bodies who should dress in a certain way, behave in a certain way, talk in a certain way. This is something we have to challenge  it is women who should be deciding what they want to wear, what they want to say, what they want to do. It should not be someone elses job to tell us how to dress, how to talk, how to walk. A more relaxed vision of Malala the student comes in a YouTube interview with a&#xa0;fellow student, known as Miss Varz, when they talk about books and takeaway food. This side of her comes across too on her Twitter account&#xa0; she signed up on the day her A-levels finished last June, posting a&#xa0;screenshot of her Oxford acceptance news a&#xa0;few weeks later, along with pictures of her younger brother getting his hair dyed blond, and of herself eating pakoras with her best friend from school. But, mostly, the posts offer a&#xa0;portrait of the extraordinary pace of her life. On New Years Eve, she posted a&#xa0;list of her 2017 highlights&#xa0; A-levels, Oxford, writing a&#xa0;book for children, visiting the UN general assembly, becoming a UN messenger of peace and a Canadian honorary citizen, and visiting Iraq and Kurdistan, Nigeria, Mexico and Canada. The list goes&#xa0;on. She is used to the juggling act. Ive been struggling with studies and the work that I&#xa0;do outside school for girls education [for] the last five to six years. I&#xa0;had to take my GCSEs and now do my A-levels  and now university, she says. So far, it has gone well."
"77""Millions of people around the world are taking part in events to mark International women Day on 8 March as part of the ongoing fight for equality.    Related: Women march in London to call for gender equality    If youre participating in or have organised an event, or are marking the day in your own personal way, wed like to hear from you.  Wherever you are you can share your photographs, videos and messages with us and well feature a selection in our reporting, including live coverage throughout the day on 8 March.  How to get involved Tell us what how youre marking the day and share pictures and video via the form below or with the GuardianWitness contribute buttons. Tell us what does the day mean to you and what message youd like to share.What is the mood among other people whore involved where you are?        If you are having trouble using the form, click here. "
"78""France is to introduce on-the-spot fines for sexual harassment in public places and lengthen the time-limit for filing rape complaints as part of new legislation against sexual violence. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has said the aim is to ensure women are not afraid to be outside.  The legislation, which will be presented at a cabinet meeting on Wednesday and go to parliament in the coming months, was prepared before the sexual harassment allegations against the Hollywood film producer Harvey Weinstein and the #MeToo movement, but it has gained prominence since. The law will also set a new legal age of consent  15  at which a minor is considered able to agree to a sexual relationship with an adult aged over 18. This move follows outrage over a case in which a rape charge was dropped when a court decided an 11-year-old girl had consented to sex with a man more than twice her age. The crackdown on sexual harassment would mean fines for degrading or humiliating comments or hostile and offensive sexual or sexist behaviour towards a person in a public place. The minister for gender equality, Marlne Schiappa, has explained this could include situations such as men aggressively asking a women for her phone number dozens of times when she is clear she is not interested, as well as sexual intimidation and harassment on public transport.  The legislation, which would be enforced by police officers issuing on-the-spot fines, is backed by 90% of the French public, according to an Ifop poll published on Wednesday. A 2016 study by a national association of transport users in France found that 83% of women using public transport said they had been subjected to catcalling or intimidating comments about their appearance. Schiappa said this week that the fines would range from 90 to 750. They could be far higher for repeat offenders or in the case of aggravating circumstances. The idea is that it is high enough to be a deterrent but also that we could be sure the harasser can pay it immediately, so that the law can be efficient, she said. Questioned over whether punishing harassment in public places was difficult to enforce, Schiappa told Le Monde this month: Its important that French laws state that it is forbidden to threaten, intimidate or follow women in the street. She said it was part of a cultural fight by the government.  At the UN in New York this month, Schiappa said: We have to say: Young men, you dont have the right, youre not allowed to follow women on the streets, to intimidate them. The new law will also give people who have been raped as children more time to file a complaint. They will be able to do so until they are 48, an extension of 10 years.  This follows recent cases in which former child victims insisted time limits must be extended. In 2016, Flavie Flament, a French radio producer, accused the photographer David Hamilton of raping her when she was 13, but said the time limit had passed for her to press charges. Hamilton, 83, killed himself in 2016 after Flament went public with her allegations and others also surfaced.  The bill also aims to increase sanctions against cyberstalking and online sexual harassment, particularly when committed by a group of several people targeting one person. "
"79""There are almost four times more men than women in Britains highest-paid posts, according to scandalous figures that show the extent of the glass ceiling blocking women from top jobs. Government data reveals the huge disparity in the number of men and women with a six-figure income, fuelling concerns over the gender pay gap in the City and other professions. There were 681,000 men earning 100,000 or more in 2015-16, according to new HMRC data. It compares with only 179,000 women. The latest figures show that 17,000 men earned 1m in 2015-16, while only 2,000 women did so. The findings provoked immediate concern from two former Tory cabinet ministers for women, Nicky Morgan and Justine Greening. The data, released last week, also revealed a large gender gap in average earnings. Male taxpayers had a median annual income of 25,700; their female counterparts earned 20,300. The figures do not account for the fact that more women are in part-time and low-paid work, as those who do not earn enough to pay income tax are not included. The data comes as the countrys biggest companies are forced to publish their payrolls by gender before April. Organisations with 250 or more workers must publish their figures, with many high-salary City firms among the worst performers. The gap in pay at Virgin Money is 32.5%, while asset management firm Octopus Capital has a 38.1% difference.   Related: Gender pay gap widening for women in their 20s, data shows    Several major firms had attempted to mask the full extent of their pay gaps by omitting company partners. Government guidelines state their salaries do not have to be included as they are paid a share of the profits, rather than being directly paid by the companies. However, under pressure from campaigners, some have now included partners, most of whom are male. The updated figures reveal that women earn 43% less than men at accountancy firm Deloitte. Fellow accountant EY, which originally reported a gap of 20%, published a revised gap of 38% once partners were included. Following the release of the figures, Greening said: These stark figures show how far our country still has to go on closing our gender pay gap. It represents not only a loss of career earnings for women, it also represents a loss of talent for employers. What counts now is companies taking action to close this gap. That means making flexible working laws actually work on the ground, enabling women to get on with their careers after, as well as before, starting a family, and it means more girls aiming for the high-paying careers in areas like engineering that have been male-dominated. Morgan, now the Treasury select committee chair, said the higher proportion of men than women in senior roles was a key driver of the gender pay gap. Sunlight is the best disinfectant; sanctions may be necessary to ensure openness and transparency. Money talks, and perhaps more of the stick may eventually be needed to close the gender pay gap, she said.   Related: women in key No 10 role paid 15,000 less than men for same job    Sophie Walker, leader of the women Equality party, said: These figures show inequality runs through every level of the economy. It is scandalous that women still make up barely a fifth of top earners, and this discrepancy is not confined to those in well-paid jobs. Gender inequality is a feature, not a coincidence or side-effect, of our economic, political and social system. The foundation of that model is the unpaid childcare and social care work that is predominately done by women  and which is not recognised in official economic data or factored into political calculations. That has obvious knock-on effects on women earnings and their chances of climbing to the top of the career ladder. The dominance of men in high-paid posts has also seen them reap most of the benefits of recent tax cuts, according to research by the women Budget Group, which monitors the impact of government policies. It has warned that the governments pledge to raise the personal tax allowance to 12,500 will disproportionately benefit men, as 66% of those who do not earn enough to benefit are women. Meanwhile, men form 73% of those who would gain from raising the higher rate tax band to 50,000. Brenda Trenowden, chair of the 30% Club, which campaigns for more women on company boards, said there was no quick fix. There are a number of factors  including better management of women, appropriate senior role models, and breaking down the gender bias  which need to be implemented, she said."
"80""Feeling the environment with all your senses is wonderful: Katri Konttinen, 29, Rovaniemi The most important thing for me is the nature here. We have four beautiful and different seasons, and currently we are heading towards spring after a dark winter. The sun feels warm and people are enjoying the beautiful frosty days outdoors. I would describe my home town Rovaniemi as a winter town, where the weather is enjoyed both by the locals and visitors. When you see the sky full of stars or manage to catch the northern lights, it gives you a magical feeling.  Nature provides us with multiple ways to enjoy it during the seasons. In the winter people go outside skiing or ice fishing and they enjoy berry and mushroom picking during the late summer and autumn. Autumn is also a popular time for hunting. Going outdoors to a forest or on a frozen lake creates a massive feeling of happiness. You find yourself in totally quiet surroundings where you can feel the environment with all your senses and it is wonderful.  I would also say that though we are a small nation we have a very rich language. There are many dialects in Finland and it is great to hear them spoken. Finland is a bilingual country and Swedish is spoken as the main language in some parts of the country. As Finnish is a small language we start to learn other languages quite early at school which from my point of view is a very good thing. Like in any country, we have problems  big and small ones. But, in the end, there are many things that are good here. It is the people, the nature, freedom and many other things that make Finland a lovable place to live in.  People are happy with what they have: Sabrina Logeais, 40, Lentiira     Lake near Lentiira, Finland Photograph: Sabrina Logeais    I am originally from France and Ive been living in east Finland for 20 years in a small village . Shops are around a 30-45 min drive away, and buses are only available during school timewith one in the morning and one in the afternoon. I think its the culture and the way of living close to nature that makes Finland the happiest country. People respect each other and are happy with what they have and dont think about what they could have. We also enjoy simple things like nature, saunas, family, and silence. We help others when they need it. In my village, I bought a building that was owned by the town and some of villagers helped me paint it. We often have long cold winters and there are a lot of mosquitoes in the summer but it could be worse.  Theres a culture of trust and a lack of corruption: Melissa Georgiou, Helsinki   s son Milo plays in the snow\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Melissas son Milo plays in the snow. Photograph: Melissa Georgiou    There are a few main factors that make Finns so happy and its not the grey Helsinki weather. Although even when the skies are grey, the air is clean. Theres a culture of trust and a lack of corruption. It doesnt matter how much wealth you have, everyone expects to pay their taxes. These are very high but so are the benefits in return. People arent worried about their basic needs not being met. Finland has also struck the right balance between learning and play in their education system. Learning is of ultimate value but so is play. Both are offered by the education system in equal measure.  I never have the need to prove myself or justify my actions because of my gender: Hanna Pajulammi,37, Jyvskyl     Hannas daughter enjoying the summer weather in Finland Photograph: Hanna Pajulammi    We Finns are happy because of high taxes. Of course Id like to keep more of my income, but it makes it easier for people to live stress free. Because of our healthcare, getting sick wont necessarily mean bankruptcy. Every single citizen is entitled to equal and world class quality treatment for next to nothing. Daycare is free for many, and only a fraction of the real cost to families with high incomes. Our gender equality is nowhere near perfect, but still very good compared to other countries. As a doctor I never have the need to prove myself or justify my actions because of my gender. So combining career and family life is very much possible. We have a fair amount of paid annual leave, and Im taking five days right now to ski with my family in Lapland. Five days surrounded by beautiful and clean arctic nature. Not too bad, huh?  Every citizen is equal: Eerika Roos-Kulvik, Helsinki     Eerika Roos-Kulvik and her daughter forming a heart with their arms while snowboarding Photograph: Eerika Roos-Kulvik    Its about so many things. We dont have serious terrorism, gun violence, pollution or homeless people living on the streets. Our country is safe and you can trust the police and the law. Everything works and people mostly play by the rules. We are quite honest and we dont do small talk - we tell it how it is. We have complete access to the internet and every citizen is equal; we have free healthcare, free education from elementary to university and Finland is one of the worlds safest places to give birth or to be born.  It doesnt matter what your background is; anyone can be anything if they just work hard for their dreams. And if you fall, our social security system will catch you. Or at least it is designed to do so. We love our clean nature and believe in fresh air. Babies nap outside in sub-zero temperatures, and our kids are taught to ski and skate at an early age. Finland was the first country in Europe and the third country in the world to give women a right to vote in 1906. We had our first female minister in 1926, and since then we have had a women as a president and a prime minister. So in terms of equality, gender and otherwise, I like to think that we are well educated and open minded."
"81""The mainstream media is celebrating the centenary of women partial suffrage, granted in 1918. No doubt there will be limited coverage of International women Day on Thursday 8 March. And yet women continue to suffer the harsh effects of needless austerity, as they are still the main managers and carers of their own and others families. We face exploitation as paid workers and discrimination as women across the board. Both injustices are embedded in a patriarchal system which only concedes equal pay and opportunity when and where it maximises profit. This is the market economy. The global recession has hit women hard and they face a double whammy as producers and reproducers. Sexual harassment and violent assault come with the territory. However, we are strong in the struggle, as the current strike over university pensions demonstrates. Women are on the picket lines of the University and College Union (UCU), protesting against changes proposed by the managers of the university superannuation scheme, which will substantially reduce our pensions by putting them at the mercy of the market. The excuse is a deficit which clearly does not exist except in the minds of dystopian future fantasists.   Related: Mary Wollstonecraft must finally have her statue | Letters    And guess what? Along with the threat to a fixed and guaranteed professional pension, women are now paying far higher national insurance contributions and waiting for their state pensions way beyond what they planned for  as Waspi (women Against State Pension Inequality) has highlighted. During the last decade, women have been robbed of a secure retirement and the welfare support and benefits they have paid for in taxes. So as one part of the fight for our rights, we shall be wrapped up warm on the UCU picket lines on university campuses, backing our union in their negotiations with management. Its&#xa0;never too late to join the struggle, wherever it is taking place.Dr Paula James Open University retired senior lecturer Dr Alison Penn Lecturer, Open University  As Professor Julia Higgins rightly identifies (Letters, 3 March), gender biases can start early in life. That is why senior women members of Prospect union working in science, sport, forensics, film and other areas where women are chronically under-represented, recently went back to school to produce a film and information for teachers on challenging gender biases. Unfortunately, although gender stereotypes often start early, they are not only confined to schools. For&#xa0;far too many women, battling them persists throughout their careers. Although some employers can be sympathetic, it often takes women working together in a union to tackle these biases head on and deliver fair recognition, pay and conditions for women at work. If readers want to change their workplaces this International women Day, a positive first step would be to join a&#xa0;union.Sue FernsSenior deputy general secretary, Prospect union  It is unlikely that sexual harassment in our society will end unless certain laws, like the one being called for by Labour MP Melanie Onn (Make catcalling hate crime, Labour MP to urge parliament, 7 March), are passed and enforced. Some argue that making misogynistic acts a hate crime is heavy-handed, but its not when you consider that harassment is pervasive and happens because of deep-rooted gender inequalities that teach men they are entitled to women bodies and that the legal system, as well as other systems, is on their side and condones it. According to new research published this week by ActionAid, two-thirds of women in the UK, Brazil, India and South Africa who have been sexually harassed have not officially reported it to the police. And 50% said it was because they believed it would be pointless. ActionAid works globally to alleviate these universal barriers to justice but there is a need for a more unified approach. Catcalling, upskirting and downblousing will prevail and lead to other more abhorrent acts of violence unless we change certain attitudes and use the legal system to do this. We want a world where women have the confidence to say #MyBodyIsMine and no one elses.Anne QuesneySenior women rights advocacy adviser, ActionAid UK  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"82""Demands for an end to violence against women, equality in the workplace and more diverse representation in positions of power are nothing new on International women Day  the cry for change is as regular as the day itself. But this year, feminists argue, could be different: people may just be listening.   Related: International Women's Day 2018: protests across the world as women press for progress  live    Since sexual harassment scandals tore through Hollywood last October, the repercussions keep on coming. In multiple workplaces, across unrelated fields, we are starting to see what change might look like.  At the start of the year 300 Hollywood employees, including many high-profile stars, launched the Times Up legal fund to support women fighting sexual misconduct; in less than a month, all UK companies with more than 250 employees will have to report their gender pay gaps; across the globe women are confronting repressive laws and speaking up at home and at work.  We asked leading feminist thinkers if they were hopeful this International women Day  and what change they wanted to see. Rebecca Solnit, a columnist, historian, activist and contributing editor at Harpers magazine  When this started to really get under way in about 2014, I said I have been waiting my whole life for this. What I wanted all these years is for someone to diagnose this as a huge, pervasive, societal and cultural problem that affects most, if not all, women. And to recognise that the change we need also has to be broad and deep and societal rather than women improving their taste in men or what they wear or where they go. We got so much advice about how to fix the problem that men want to destroy us. It does feel like we are diagnosing an epidemic: that is the work that will let us treat it. And there is space to talk about it in a way there has not been before. It does feel like this is a moment in which there is no going back. In part because it feels like this time around, as never before, a lot of men get it, are horrified by the scale and ugliness of what goes on. [But] patriarchy is not going to give up without a battle.     Rebecca Solnit. Photograph: John Lee for the Guardian    The impact will have to be case by case. I feel a lot of men no longer feel free to grope and leer at their co-workers, and that is immeasurable but significant. And thats what interests me about change, part of my Hope in the Dark work [focuses on] the fact that a lot of time change isnt going to be measurable and calculable, and the most important things that happen as a result are going to be the things that dont happen. The bosses who dont think they can get away with this, the women who dont think they have to put up with this. Im not optimistic, but I am hopeful. I think that there has been a shift that is less law and legislation than shifts in consciousness and visibilities, and that will have consequences. Nadifa Mohamed, author  I think there is a collective excitement. Its about having this right to complain not just when its horrifying, terrifying abuse but the kind of petty stuff thats much more common.      Nadifa Mohamed. Photograph: Jeremy Sutton-Hibbert/Getty Images    Even the language has changed, people now talk about micro-aggressions, on a racial or sex harassment level, and its actually a really good word. You are not saying your life has come to an end or youve been permanently harmed, but its an aggression and its coming from multiple angles all the time. We now have the language to talk about that, and the opportunity to be listened to. Susie Orbach, psychotherapist, psychoanalyst and writer I think it is an exciting moment and its gathering in cross-generational constituencies. Its also, to some extent, cross-class and certainly the #MeToo movement is cross-ethnicity and cross-race. Its allowed for all sorts of previously invisible agendas to be seen.     Susie Orbach. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose for the Observer    There is a whole new lens to see how the world has been constructed. Its a way to think about every sector in different ways. This is linking rape as a weapon of war with the kind of requirements for femininity that have been practised by western women. Its ravishing on an emotional, intellectual and political level. I think there is a belief [among some men] that it has gone too far, but they are not getting that from the women they are talking to.  Caroline Criado-Perez, journalist, feminist campaigner and co-founder of The women Room Its great that people are really talking about this, and it feels like there may be a shift. But I am just concerned about whether there is going to be a real serious change in all aspects of life as a result.      Caroline Criado-Perez. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian    Its very easy for politicians and celebrities to wear a T-shirt or wear black and say this matters, its much harder to actually change legislation to look at the various processes that are holding women back. This isnt just about peoples attitudes  its about the fundamental building blocks of society. Kat Banyard, founder of UK Feminista Everyone has a crucial role to play in ensuring that the growing calls for action against sexism translate into long-lasting change  and that includes our education institutions. To bring about a generational shift we have to stop schools being places where young people learn that sexism and sexual harassment are routine experiences, tolerated by those in positions of authority.     Kat Banyard. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian    New research by UK Feminista and the National Education Union has found that sexual harassment, sexist language and gender stereotyping are rife in schools, yet teachers report feeling ill-equipped to respond. That is why Ofsted, teacher training providers and the Department for Education urgently need to step up and act now. Laura Bates, founder of Everyday Sexism  I feel both wary and excited. Part of me wants to believe that this really is a tipping point, and another part of me remembers the wise words of veteran feminist, Cynthia Enloe, who recently asked: How many tipping points have we had?      Cynthia Enloe and Laura Bates. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian    Brave, brilliant women have taken the first step, now we need to see proper reporting procedures, unconscious bias training, gender pay gap initiatives, survivor support services, the reinstatement of section 40 of the Equality Act, to make employers responsible for protecting workers from third-party harassment.    Related: Gender pay gap: what we learned in week two    Whether or not structural initiatives are put in place will ultimately determine whether this is a watershed or just another media moment.  Minna Salami, founder of the MsAfropolitan blog, which covers Africa and the diaspora from a feminist perspective women history is marked by moments when a sudden peak in feminist awareness emerges. We are definitely now in the midst of such a peak feminist moment. What makes it especially exciting is that, largely thanks to social media and the conversations sparked by multiple fora, it is challenging gender norms in our intimate spaces as well as public spaces. The popularity of the #MeToo and Times Up campaigns has brought the conversations home.     Minna Salami. Photograph: Minna Salami    There is so much courage, boldness and determination in the air. What is especially exciting is the increased awareness about feminist issues in the mainstream. As someone whos been writing and speaking about feminism for years, I feel a sense of amazement at how quickly feminism is suddenly rippling into the collective consciousness. Julie Bindel, freelance journalist and political activist, and a founder of Justice for Women We have had some important victories this year  from the victims of sex attacker John Worboys winning their claim for compensation from the Metropolitan police, and being granted permission to challenge the Parole Boards decision to release him, to women forced into prostitution no longer being required to reveal past convictions to potential employers.     Julie Bindel. Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer    But I think that we have to battle for every victory, and we can never rest on our laurels, while we live in a culture of structural oppression. Emma Dabiri, a visual sociology PhD researcher at Goldsmiths, and teaching fellow in the Africa department at Soas While there is a lot of talk, systemically I dont know how much is shifting.      Emma Dabiri    We see the use of radical language co-opted to suited hegemonic interests. There is seemingly room for a few more women, more queer people, more brown bodies to take up space, but are they just being absorbed into the status quo? I think we have to ask ourselves what we actually want to achieve? Is Feminism about increasing consumerist choices within the neoliberal paradigm, or should we seek to reconnect with its history of radicalism and socialism that it is increasingly untethered from?"
"83"" Sexual predators, harassers and bullies in the entertainment industries who are lying low, hoping that people will forget, must never be allowed to repeat or get away with their behaviour, the actors union Equity has said. 
On Thursday it published a report titled Agenda for Change, its response to the sexual harassment scandal, with a raft of recommendations covering subjects including safety at work, sex scenes, nudity, casting and gender balance. 
 
  Related: UK actors union Equity launches inquiry to tackle sexual harassment  
 
Among the main measures is the launch of a safe space campaign, which will include posters, a helpline, and productions being encouraged to have a safe space statement read before rehearsals begin. The union is also promising to investigate non-disclosure agreements, which it says potentially protect perpetrators of harassment. 
The actor Maureen Beattie, Equitys vice-president, who led the unions working group on sexual harassment, said the report was an opportunity which may not come our way again for many years to harness the energy released after the Harvey Weinstein scandal. 
She said some people were lying low as public interest in the subject continued. People who have behaved badly are, I suspect, behaving well and hoping that nobody remembers they behaved badly, and slowly but surely what will happen is that the perpetrators will start to think they can do it again. Thats when we will still be there. 
 
  Related: UK police receive fresh Harvey Weinstein sexual assault claim  
 
On nudity, Equity said it would reiterate its existing provisions: that people at auditions should not be asked to undress unless a mutually agreed observer is present and that auditions should not include requests to perform simulated sex acts. 
There had been reports that the union was considering bringing in more stringent guidelines and backing the use of specialist intimacy directors, but Beattie said not all actors wanted more people involved. The report says the union was examining the value and role of intimacy direction. 
Beattie said the union had always supported members when it came to harassment and bullying. But I do believe things have got worse, and this was a chance to look at ourselves and see what we were doing. Were we doing enough? Were we doing it right? What more can we do? 
The safe space campaign would involve posters in rehearsal rooms, TV studios and at stage doors encouraging people to have the confidence to challenge inappropriate behaviour. 
A form of words to be read at the start of every project and production has been drafted and includes a statement on everyone being entitled to work in a space free of fear, bullying and harassment. 
 
  
  
   
    Key recommendation of the cross-party group
    
    
     All those who work in the Houses of Parliament should be subject to a new behaviour code.
     Complaints and grievance should be handled by a new system independent of political parties.
     Under the proposed system complaints would spark a confidential inquiry by the parliamentary commissioner for standards.
     Sexual harassment and sexual violence should be dealt with by a trained sexual violence adviser in a procedure separate from complaints about other forms of inappropriate behaviour.
     Complaints would be dealt with confidentially to protect the alleged victims anonymity. If allegations were proved, perpetrators would be identified and subject to tougher sanctions.
     On receiving the commissioners report, standards committees in the Commons and Lords would be able to recommend the suspension of an MP or peer for a specified period.
     This could trigger proceedings for recall of an MP  resulting in a new election in their constituency  or the expulsion of a peer.&nbsp;
    
    
    
    -
    
   
  
  
 
The report lists duties of care for people who manage actors and performers. Casting directors should, for example, actively discourage one-to-one meetings in non-professional environments. 
Venues are being asked to recognise that audiences can also be the perpetrators of bullying and harassment. 
Agents need to have a clear and robust code of practice on how to deal with allegations. They also need to ensure that performers are advised in writing about the extent and nature of any nudity in any job. Boards should strive for gender balance, diversity and inclusion in their organisations. 
 
  
  
  Equitys report is an opportunity to harness the energy released by Harvey Weinstein scandal, says actor Maureen Beattie. 
  Photograph: Steve Crisp/Reuters 
  
 
Beattie, who has appeared in Casualty and Doctor Who and will appear in the upcoming Broadway transfer of Yerma with Billie Piper, said she had experienced sexual harassment in her career, both as a victim and bystander. It is my fervent hope that the work that follows this report will lead to a future where no one has to suffer harassment of any kind ever again. 
When the media has moved on, the reason for the posters, this report, the statement, is  we are not going away. We will be there. We will keep on going until everything shifts. 
The report by Equity, which represents 43,000 people across the entertainment industry, is one of a number that have come out since details of Weinsteins behaviour emerged. The Royal Court theatre was first off the mark, publishing a code of behaviour in November. In mid-February the BFI published eight clear and simple principles to tackle bullying and harassment in the UKs screen industries."
"84""Employees in one of the most overworked countries in Asia are about to get a break after South Korea passed a bill to reduce the typical work week in an effort to improve quality of life and boost employment. South Koreas National Assembly overwhelmingly passed the law which cut the maximum weekly work hours to 52, down from 68. The law comes into force in July and will apply to large companies before being rolled out to smaller businesses. The cut was a campaign promise by President Moon Jae-in, who also secured a 16% increase in the minimum wage this year. The law faced opposition from businesses but was seen as necessary to improve living standards, create more jobs and boost productivity. It is also aimed at increasing the countrys birth rate, which hit record lows last year. As South Koreas economy boomed in the 80s and 90s, a workaholic culture took hold and the birth rate plummeted. Chung Hyun-back, the gender equality and family minister, has called the countrys working hours inhumanely long and said they were a factor in the Souths rapidly ageing society.   Related: Top 10 books about South Korea    South Koreans workers have some of the longest weeks among members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, behind only Mexico. The group of mostly developed economies does not include countries such as China and India, and developing countries tend to work more. But South Koreans still work about 400 more hours a year compared with workers in the UK and Australia, about 10 additional standard work weeks, despite having relatively similar average incomes. The new South Korean work week will consist of 40 normal hours and an additional 12 hours of overtime. It could cost businesses an additional 12tn won ($11bn) a year to maintain the same levels of production, according to a study by the Korean Economic Research Institute. The new law reduced the number of exempted businesses from 26 to five, including transport and healthcare. People under 18 will also only be able to work 35 hours a week, down from 40, equivalent to a typical week in France."
"85""Emily Chang is an American journalist and host of the US TV show Bloomberg Technology. Her new book, Brotopia, is an expos of Silicon Valleys macho culture. What is Brotopia?Its this idea that Silicon Valley is a modern utopia where anyone can change the world or make their own rules, if they are a man. But if you are a women it is incomparably harder. And that shows in the numbers. Women-led companies get just 2% of venture capital funding. That is egregious, especially in an industry that prides itself on being a meritocracy where anyone can succeed. We need people of all backgrounds to be making these products, because people everywhere are using them. How did men come to rule in Silicon Valley? You say it hasnt always been like this.Women were programming computers in the early days of the military and Nasa. Then, as the industry started to explode, these personality tests were developed to identify people who could be good at this job. And it was decided, though there is no evidence to support the idea, that good programmers dont like people. Well, the research tells us if you hire people who dont like people, you hire far more men than women. These tests perpetuated the stereotype of the antisocial, mostly white, male nerds who many of us think of when we think of computer programmers. That has also extended to entrepreneurs as well. Steve Jobs sort of proved a different kind of person could start an amazing company, but we created another stereotype of a swaggering, risk-taking bro instead, which also selected for men. So whats Brotopia like for the women who do inhabit it?They are frustrated and tired of being the only women in the room, day after day. They are doing this sort of second job that men dont have to do, which is prove that they deserve to be there. At the same time, they are fending off sexual advances because they are the only women in the room. The circumstances for female entrepreneurs are especially challenging. Most have not just one story to tell about bad behaviour or an unwanted advance, but several. How does Silicon Valley compare with other sectors, such as Wall Street, which is also notoriously sexist?I cant tell you how many times, as I was interviewing for this book, people said to me: Well, Silicon Valley cant possibly be worse than Wall Street. Well, it is. The gender imbalance is a lot bigger: the top banks are generally 50/50 when it comes to representation; in Silicon Valley, women hold 25% of jobs. Isnt the problem a pipeline one  there just arent the female computer science graduates coming through?Silicon Valley created the pipeline problem by creating this very narrow idea of who can be good at the job. The industry [also] has a big retention problem  women are twice as likely to quit tech than men  and that is because it is so male-dominated and the culture is not inclusive. Unconscious bias is a huge problem. How might our tech products have been better if women had been more involved?Evan Williams, co-founder of Twitter, told me that he thinks if women had been on the early Twitter team, online harassment and trolling wouldnt be such a problem. They just werent thinking about how Twitter could be used to send death threats when they were building the product. In addition, maybe porn wouldnt be so ubiquitous and video games wouldnt be so violent. The book details drug-fuelled sex parties where rich and powerful men invite women in two-to-one ratios, and tech bros attending strip clubs in the middle of the day. Indeed, you visit a strip club in the tech-heavy South of Market region of San Francisco. How extensive is this kind of behaviour and how does it hurt women in tech?It depends on the circles you run in. For some, the [sex party] scene feels ever-present and I spoke to a number of women who either left the country or moved to New York because they didnt feel comfortable. I spoke to [female] engineers at Uber who said they were invited to strip clubs and bondage clubs in the middle of the day. It is putting women in very uncomfortable situations where they feel sort of damned if they do and damned if they dont. Because so much business is happening outside the office, if they want access to those opportunities, they feel like they have to participate. The bottom line is there shouldnt be a cuddle puddle at a company party. What possible format could a sex party have in Silicon Valley that would be OK?There are plenty of sex parties where there are very strict rules around consent, alcohol and gender ratios. The Bay Area has had a long tradition of sexual exploration, sexual liberation and sex positivity. But these events [I report on] are a lot more about power than about sexual exploration and it is a power dynamic that is completely lopsided. Google used to have a better representation of women, but now its no better than average, with 20% of women in tech roles. What went wrong?Google founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin really focused on hiring and promoting women in the early days. And they got some incredible women  Susan Wojcicki, Sheryl Sandberg and Marissa Mayer  who made incredible contributions to the company [Wojcicki is now CEO of YouTube; Sandberg COO of Facebook; and Mayer stepped down as CEO of Yahoo last year]. But over time, Google lost focus. It began exploding in size, became focused on getting people in the seats as fast as possible and defaulted to all of the same hiring and recruiting strategies that other companies use. What role has Silicon Valley played in the #MeToo movement?I think women in Silicon Valley were pioneering in having the courage to come forward and they deserve a lot of credit for helping women summon their collective courage. It started with Ellen Pao [a former junior partner at venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins, who sued for gender discrimination in 2012]. She lost in court but won in the court of public opinion. Then Susan Fowler came forward and that catalysed several women in tech to come forward about investors. What happens to the men in Silicon Valley who leave following revelations of sexual harassment? Are they landing on their feet?I think it is too early to tell. We, as a society, need to think about what we are OK with when it comes to a next act. When are we ready to forgive? I dont know the answer to that question. There are so many problems  where do you start to fix things? And can Silicon Valley ever really change?I am hopeful. I believe that the same people who changed the world can change this too. They can hire women and pay them fairly. I look into a company called Slack, where the CEO has made hiring and promoting women a specific priority. Slack has focused on giving people the tools to combat their own bias, it has diversified its recruiting teams, it asks employees for diverse referrals, it has built structured reviews and feedback systems and it has done a comprehensive pay review. It is showing in the numbers  about 43.5% women. Aside from not harassing women, what can individual men in Silicon Valley do to make things better?Men need to listen and be advocates. It has been interesting on my book tour: half the audience feel so validated and grateful that someone is finally speaking for them, while half are completely in disbelief. For so long, women have been living this every day and men have been ignorant of it and blind to it. I dont think there are always bad intentions there, but I do think that at a certain point ignorance becomes wilful. 2017: a year of reckoning       Sheryl Sandberg, COO of Facebook, has spoken recently of her experiences of sexual harassment in the tech industry. Photograph: Vincent Isore/IP3/Getty Images    February 2017Computer engineer Susan Fowler publishes a blog post about her experience of sexual harassment at her former company, Uber, prompting an investigation into its culture. Waves of customers delete the Uber app and an exodus of its executives, some because of inappropriate conduct, begins. June 2017Uber CEO Travis Kalanick resigns under pressure from some investors. Venture capitalist Justin Caldbeck resigns from Binary Capital, the firm he co-founded, following sexual harassment allegations by female entrepreneurs. July 2017Dave McClure of tech accelerator 500 Startups resigns after the New York Times publishes the accounts of a number of tech industry women who were sexually harassed by male investors, including McClure and Chris Sacca of Lowercase Capital. September 2017Former female Google engineers sue the company, claiming gender-based pay discrimination. Female Uber engineers file a similar lawsuit the following month. October 2017An expos of US film producer Harvey Weinstein, detailing many women accounts of sexual harassment and assault, is published in the New York Times, sparking the #MeToo campaign. Amazon executive Roy Price resigns following harassment allegations. November 2017Venture capitalist Steve Jurvetson leaves Draper Fisher Jurvetson, the firm he cofounded, amid an investigation into sexual misconduct, which he denies. December 2017Venture capitalist Shervin Pishevar resigns from Sherpa Capital, the firm that he co-founded, following sexual misconduct allegations, which he denies. Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg details her experiences of sexual harassment.  Brotopia by Emily Chang is published by Penguin (20.99). To order a copy for 17.84 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over 10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of 1.99"
"86""The Tongan government has banned schoolgirls from playing rugby or boxing because the sports are deemed undignified and not in keeping with the islands traditional culture. The letter from the ministry of education has caused outrage among many Tongans, who say the directive is outdated and sexist.  Dame Valerie Adams, New Zealands two-time Olympic shot put champion, whose mother is Tongan, criticised the ban. According to this way of thinking, a proud Tongan like myself could not attain the standing I have in this world. Tongan women must be free to choose their destiny, and not be held back by misguided and stubborn misinterpretation, Adams said on Facebook. Honouring tradition and following passion need not come into conflict. Rugby, like any sport, ought to be embraced by our Tongan women  were good at it  dont take it away! Tongan women rights advocate Ofa Guttenbeil-Likiliki said the ban represented an obsolete view. It takes us right back to the thinking that education is only academic and for girls to remain in that kind of academic lane, sports is just the alternative for boys, Guttenbeil-Likiliki  told Dateline Pacific. It is really just taking us back from all the work we have done so far in trying to achieve and bring forward gender equality in Tonga. The New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said her countrys aid program to Tonga was not threatened by the ban, but she disagreed with it.    Related: Fight like a girl: the female boxers of the Democratic Republic of the Congo    As a school student I played touch rugby and I would encourage all the young women to engage in whatever sporting code they are interested in.  We do provide funding  to Tonga to encourage childrens participation in sports. And so a young women will still be able to do that, I understand, through their villages, even if this dictate is made by these schools. On social media, many expressed anger at the ban, which the ministry of education said was necessary to preserve the dignity of Tongan women and hold on to Tongan cultural values. The chief education officer, Manu Akauola, told Dateline Pacific the directive was ordered by the education minister, Penisimani Fifita, due to concerns that children had missed too much class time due to Cyclone Gita, a category five storm that hit the island in February. So his direction is not because were not supportive of the sporting events, its just [to] make up the lost time weve lost because of the cyclone, Akauola said."
"87""The Vatican is to host its first hackathon this week, harnessing the technological skills and creativity of students from more than 50 universities around the world to tackle issues identified as priorities by Pope Francis. About 120 students and 35 mentors will gather in Rome over three days to focus on social inclusion, migrants and refugees, and interfaith dialogue. The aim is to bring people with backgrounds in technology, business, civil society and the humanities together to bring new perspectives to key global issues, said Father Eric Salobir, a Catholic priest and president of the research and innovation network Optic. The VHacks event is being organised in partnership with some of the worlds biggest tech companies, including Google and Microsoft. Participating students come from a range of backgrounds. There is a minority of Catholics. We have a big number of Muslims taking part and also Jews and people of no faith. There is a gender balance, and all five continents are represented, said Jakub Florkiewicz, a technology consultant and organiser of VHacks. The pope has spoken of the potential of technology and science to increase knowledge and understanding, but has also urged innovation to be coupled with equality and social inclusion. He has warned young people of the limits of tech-based interactions, saying social media are no substitute for human connection, and he has highlighted the risks as well as benefits of artificial intelligence. This year he told the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland: Artificial intelligence, robotics and other technological innovations must be so employed that they contribute to the service of humanity and to the protection of our common home, rather than to the contrary. It is vital to safeguard the dignity of the human person. Salobir said: Because [the pope] points to dangers doesnt mean hes anti-technology. Its the way its utilised. He is really concerned about a certain type of technology related to a certain type of capitalism. He said the hackathon was a sign of the transformation of the [Catholic] church led by Pope Francis. Its a way to bring fresh air, youth and technology inside the Vatican, and to get these students to concentrate their energies on real problems. The church had a high level of engagement with big global technology companies, but this is not done in front of the microphones. Its discreet, he said. The students will be divided into teams tackling different themes. The event, which begins on Thursday, will conclude with an award for the most innovative contribution combining technology and human values."
"88""Broadly, feminism rallies for women voices to be heard. This year, one International women Day event sees this realised on a literal level: an equality-espousing superchoir is set to create a wall of sound at the women Strike Assembly in central London on 8 March. Led by Rebel Choir, the singing group of the Focus E15 housing activists, ranks will be swelled by like-minded members of the local music community. One number planned is Peggy Seegers Reclaim the Night. Its important to have a very strong, angry female song, says the choir leader, Rebecca Morris.   Related: The day that feminists took women lib to the streets    Group singing is playing a prominent role in contemporary protest; an impassioned flash-mob performance of Quiet by MILCK at the women March on Washington in January 2017 went viral. Here are other feminist choirs causing a din. F*Choir The south London-based cohort, which is helping to form the strike choir, specialise in songs about gender and inequality. Im Not Dancing by vocalist and producer pair Tirzah &amp; Micachu is a favourite, says the musical director, Jenny Moore, thanks to lines such as: Im not dancing / Im fighting subverting traditional interpretations of female behaviour. Moore reckons musics tendency towards repetition means the singers are essentially armed with empowerment mantras. Suddenly, something you thought youd never be able to say, like the Tirzah lyrics, you can access any time. Deep Throat The friskily named, all-female east London collective has rabble-roused at festivals including Green Man and Wilderness and released its first record, Be OK, last year. Loudly occupying space in the male-dominated music industry feels like a feminist act in itself, says the founder, Luisa Gerstein. SHE Choir         With branches in cities including Manchester, Newcastle and Berlin, SHE blend pop with politics. It has raised funds for charities such as Refuge. Italian working women protest songs sit in the repertoire alongside buoyant Destinys Child covers. Lips The 80-strong Islington outfit, which goes by the strapline Political. Not Pious!, supports immigration injustice campaign group Women Asylum Seekers Together (Wast) and has performed with the Wast choir outside Yarls Wood detention centre in protest at the treatment of asylum seekers. It has also collaborated with Music in Detention, a charity that helps immigration detainees to make music, covering Rihannas Stay. We try not to speak for people, but use our platform in a positive way, says one of the choirs founders, Geraldine Smith."
"89"" 
  10.21pm GMT  
 Thank you for following! 
  
  That concludes our coverage of International women Day, which, like all of our lives, was marked by both inspirational and cringeworthy moments.  
  Pioneering and overlooked women were recognized, like photographer Diane Arbus who today received her New York Times obituary. Protests were held in Spain, London and France to demand equality.  
  Susan Sarandon reminded us of the good guys out there, when she revealed actor Paul Newman gave her part of his salary. Cyprus vowed to close the gender pay gap.  
  There were also tone deaf moments women are all too familiar with. McDonalds was criticized for turning its golden arches upside-down (W!), rather than increase wages. President Trump talked women empowerment.  
  Thank you for following us through it all.  
  Here is every women who has ever won a Nobel Prize.  
   
   
    Happy International Women's Day! We're celebrating the women who have changed the world.Here's all of the amazing women who have received the #NobelPrize and their remarkable achievements at the time of the award. #IWD2018 pic.twitter.com/isKJHSGjsj The Nobel Prize (@NobelPrize) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  10.18pm GMT  
  
  As we alluded to in our previous post, women are underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) careers. So to highlight those fighting to change that gender imbalance, check out these resources. 
  First, from coder and American Association for the Advancement of Science fellow, Maryam Zaringhalam. Her list of women in sciences starts with her mother, a doctor.  
   
   
    First and always, I'm thankful for my mom. I've looked up to her all my life for her unbelievable strength &amp; warmth. She's the kind of doctor who gave her patients our home phone number so they could call any time day or night if there was anything they needed. And call they did pic.twitter.com/cUCYtFN1Uv Maryam Zaringhalam, PhD (@webmz_) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  NASAs Planetquest reminded us of Natalie Batalha, Sara Seager, Debra Fischer and Jessie Dotson, astronomers and astrophysicists leading mission such as the Kepler spacecraft and the Hubble telescope. And dont forget about the women at CERN, the worlds largest particle physics lab. 
   
   
    For #InternationalwomenDay see how many scientists are leading your favorite NASA missions. From @NASAKepler to @NASAHubble to the stars beyond our solar system, these women are breaking celestial ceilings  pic.twitter.com/cyNJF3B9AS NASA Planetquest (@PlanetQuest) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  We dont hear about them very often, but actually women have been working in science... well, forever.  
  Check out the story below of Enheduanna, the Sumerian high-priestess expected to make accurate astronomical predictions in 2300 BCE.  
  Examples from the last couple centuries? In 1938, Lise Meitner solved the problem of nuclear fission. Thirty-five years ago this week meitnerium was discovered, and became the only element named solely a women who was not a mythical figure.  
  Katherine Johnson not only helped integrate a school in West Virginia, but also made calculations for NASA space missions. She was later played by Taraji P Henson in Hidden Figures. 
  Because that clearly does not cover everyone, Scientific American compiled a whole list of women in science. And so did the 500 Women Scientists project, a resource for everyone to use to highlight women voices.  
   
   
    Enheduanna was a high-priestess and princess who lived in the Sumerian city-state of Ur, now part of Iraq. She was appointed Priestess of the Moon Goddess in about 2354 BCE, which required making accurate mathematical and astronomical predictions. #STEMlegends #WomenInSTEM pic.twitter.com/ji9IBPHahA Royal Astronomical Society (@RoyalAstroSoc) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  9.05pm GMT  
  
  In some fields, women have been underrepresented for a very long time. One good example? Philosophy.  
  The numbers of women in philosophy mirror those math, science and engineering.* 
  Tania Lombrozo, a philosopher from the University of California Berkeley, explored why in an NPR story.  
   
   To borrow a metaphor from a paper by [Louise] Antony [a prominent philosopher], philosophy could involve a perfect storm of social and psychological factors that conspire to make it difficult for women to persist in the field. No single intervention is likely to change the climate.*More on that in a moment.  
   
   
   
    the argument here is still valid : women are underrepresented in philosophy. That fact is not in dispute. So on #InternationalwomenDay, let's take a moment to reflect on the reasons why this situation persists and what can be done about it. ... . Philosophy Matters (@PhilosophyMttrs) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  *More on that in a moment.  
  
 Updated at 9.06pm GMT 
 
 
  8.35pm GMT  
  
  In other news from the swamp, a record number of women are running for Congress this year.  
  One of the 575 running for a US House, Senate or governors seat is Fayrouz Saad. She is seeking a House seat just north-west of Detroit, Michigan. Right now, 106 of the 535 Congressional seats are filled by women  or 19%.  
  During the 2016 presidential campaign, Saad said members of her family were sometimes told by strangers, I cant wait for Donald Trump to deport you. 
   
   I had this moment of clarity after the election that rather than hoping someone else steps in, why shouldnt I?... I want to run as soon as possible.  
   
  If Saad wins, she will be the first Muslim-American female member of Congress.  
   
   
    Well, obviously! Fayrouz Saad (@FayrouzSaad) 
    January 5, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  8.14pm GMT  
  
  Heres an official statement from the Trump White House about women empowerment, accompanied by pictures of his almost entirely white male cabinet sitting around a bunch of rockets. Enjoy.  
   
    
    
    Trump gestures behind a model of a rocket. US Secretary of Veterans Affairs David Shulkin sits to his left. 
    Photograph: Michael Reynolds/UPI / Barcroft Images 
    
   
   
    On International women Day, we celebrate the many incredible contributions made by women of all ages in the United States and around the world. We honor the vital role of women in our communities, businesses, civil society, and government. And we reaffirm our Nations commitment to ensuring that every person has the opportunity to succeed. 
   Despite some recent progress around the world, too many women still face tremendous barriers to participation in all aspects of life. This must change. Women are critical to economic growth and global stability. When women are empowered, communities and entire nations thrive.  
   
   
    
    
    U.S. President Donald Trump holds a cabinet meeting in Washington, with some model rockets. 
    Photograph: Kevin Lamarque/Reuters 
    
   
   
    Over the past year, my Administration has championed the creation of international initiatives to promote women economic empowerment. Through the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative (We-Fi), we are working to improve access to capital for women entrepreneurs in the developing world. With the formation of the Canada-United States Council for Advancement of Women Entrepreneurs and Business Leaders, we are engaging with the private sector to reduce barriers to women participation in business. And through the Overseas Private Investment Corporations new 2X women Initiative, we are mobilizing $1 billion for investment into projects that support women in emerging markets. 
   
   
   Moreover, I have worked with Congress to enact policies that encourage American women to pursue careers in the international arena. In October, I signed the Women, Peace, and Security Act, which promotes the participation of women in conflict prevention and post-conflict peace efforts around the world. Involvement in these efforts will provide women with important opportunities to use their skills and abilities to mediate difficult situations and to keep our country safe. 
   
   
    
    
    US President Donald Trump speaks beside US Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis and US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, with rocket models on the table. 
    Photograph: Michael Reynolds/UPI / Barcroft Images 
    
   
   
   Today, my Administration is launching USAIDs WomenConnect Challenge. In an increasingly connected world, women are lagging behind in access to the internet. In fact, 1.7 billion women in low and middle-income countries around the world remain unconnected today. The WomenConnect Challenge will help women in these developing countries gain access to the digital technology that is so foundational for productivity and participation in the global economy. 
   My Administration is also supporting women in the United States by empowering them to continue driving the success of our Nation. In 2017, the Small Business Administration increased capital loans to women-owned businesses by more than $575 million.  
   Through these and many other initiatives, we seek to empower women of all backgrounds to achieve their economic potential and shape our world. As we mark International women Day, we remain committed to the worthwhile mission of enhancing women leadership in the world and building a stronger America for all. 
   
  
 
 
  7.40pm GMT  
  
  International women Day is also tennis star Serena Williams first day back in tour. One of sports most remarkable figures, Williams gave birth last year and then survived a blood clot (which, naturally, she diagnosed herself).  
   
   I never questioned my return, the 36-year-old said on Wednesday before her comeback match in the Paribas Open in Indian Wells. 
   
   
       It&amp;#39;s official. My comeback is here. This Thursday I will start playing tennis again professionally for the first time since giving birth to my daughter. This whole month I am playing tournaments in California and Florida- both my home states. Thursday, the day I play my very first match, marks international women&amp;#39;s day. My comeback could not have come on a better day and I decided I wanted to do something different let you all be apart of my long journey back (if you want of course!!) So I created my Serena Gold toned &amp;#34;S&amp;#34; pin. When I am playing you can wear it and show support not only from me but also for my charity which supports the Yetunde Price Resource center. I want this gold &amp;#34;S&amp;#34; mean something special to you personally. What is one S word in your life that means something to you? Mine is Strong and Sure! So when I wear my &amp;#34;S&amp;#34; pin I am representing Strength, and Sureness. What would your &amp;#34;S&amp;#34; mean? They are for now only available for my fans that come see my at Indian wells, and Miami starting Wednesday as well as Thursday when I play!! Sooooo if you are watching me stop by the Serena booth to grab a &amp;#34;S&amp;#34; pin. Post pics of you wearing your &amp;#34;S&amp;#34; and tag me! Thanks for the support I look forward to seeing you out there!! A post shared by  Serena Williams (@serenawilliams) on Mar 7, 2018 at 7:16am PST \"> 
   
    Serena Williams could not hide her joy when she announced her return to tennis on social media. 
    
   
  
 
 
  7.26pm GMT  
  
  Former First Lady Michelle Obamas latest initiative works to improve education for women and girls around the world. Heres an email we just received from the Obama Foundation:  
   
   Growing up, my parents always had a clear message for me and my brother: there is nothing more important for your future than getting a good education. Nothing. 
   Even though neither of them had a college degree, they were determined to give us that opportunity. And let me tell you, my education changed everything for me  opening doors I never could have imagined and allowing me to pursue the career of my dreams. 
   ... 
   Girls who go to school marry later, have lower rates of infant and maternal mortality, are more likely to immunize their children, and are less likely to contract malaria and HIV. Girls who are educated also earn higher salaries  10%-20% more for each additional year of secondary school. And sending more girls to school and into the workforce can boost an entire countrys economy. 
   ...  
   Every single one of us has a role to play in helping girls get the education they deserve, and International women Day is the perfect time to make that commitment.  
   
   
   
    I teamed up with @Refinery29 to mark #InternationalwomenDay and to talk about my passionate commitment to empowering girls around the world through education. This will continue to be a core part of my work at the @ObamaFoundation. Michelle Obama (@MichelleObama) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  6.57pm GMT  
 BBC staff protest for equal pay 
  
  Back in London, the Press Association reports that the staff of BBC are protesting for fair pay, chanting Equal pay for equal work.  
  They stood outside BB Broadcasting House at 4:22pm GMT. Why 4:22? It is 9% short of a typical 9am-5pm working day, symbolizing the gender pay gap at BBC.  
  Here is more from the Press Association: 
   
   A huge cheer went up for Carrie Gracie, who resigned as BBC China editor earlier this year over pay inequalities, as she was brought to the front of the crowd.  
   Yes it was great to see so many people, and its great to see so many men. Isnt that cool?... 
   And it just makes the point that this is not like some people have presented it as a small group of entitled women.  
   
   
   s Day.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    BBC employees gather outside Broadcasting House in London, to highlight equal pay on International women Day. 
    Photograph: John Stillwell/PA Wire 
    
   
  
 Updated at 7.08pm GMT 
 
 
  6.25pm GMT  
  
  A piece published this week by one of my colleagues in Washington DC highlights a male-dominated institution being pushed to change  the US Senate. One of their own, US Senator Tammy Duckworth from Illinois, is about to be the first US Senator to give birth in office.  
  I feel like the Senate is actually in the 19th century as opposed to the 21st somehow and thats really unfortunate, the Democrat told my colleague Lauren Gambino, during an interview in her office. 
   
   Its a reflection of a real need for more women in leadership across our country, whether its legislatively or in boardrooms or the military. 
   
  Duckworth was one of the first women to fly combat missions in Iraq, lost both her legs when a rocket-propelled grenade hit hit her helicopter in 2004, and became the first disabled women to serve in Congress in 2012.  
  However, when Duckworth takes her upcoming leave, she will have a host of challenges thanks to current Senate rules. More from Laurens piece: 
   
   The upper chamber does not allow votes by proxy, which means Duckworth could be summoned while on leave to take critical votes. Unlike in the House, children are not allowed to accompany members on the floor. Meanwhile, if she needs to breastfeed during a vote, her best option would probably be the women restroom off the Senate floor. 
   
   
    
    
    This photo provided by Tammy Duckworth shows Duckworth serving with the Illinois Army National Guard, sitting in a helicopter during her tour of duty in Iraq. (AP Photo/Tammy Duckworth, HO) 
    Photograph: Anonymous/ASSOCIATED PRESS 
    
   
  
 
 
  6.02pm GMT  
  
  Hello from New York, and many thanks to Elle Hunt.  
  Here in the US, cities as far flung as Los Angeles and Toledo, Ohio have scheduled protests and networking events for women. As well, many women celebrities marked the occasion by tweeting about campaigning  yet relatively unknown  women. 
  The first female presidential nominee of a major US political party, Democrat Hillary Clinton, called out the US women hockey and soccer teams, who demanded equal pay. 
  The New York Times published obituaries for 15 remarkable women previously overlooked by the paper. Some of the famous names the paper excluded  photographer Diane Arbus and Ida B Wells, a, 1890s newspaper editor in Memphis, Tennessee who chronicled lynchings in the South.  
  While we acknowledge women today, it is also worth noting US-specific work that needs to be done. America is one of the only industrialized nations to lack paid family leave. Many the lowest paid professions  such as teachers assistants, personal care aides and restaurant hostesses and waiters  are dominated by women. It is also one of the most expensive places to give birth, and has some of the worst birth outcomes. 
  As well, not all of the ways America marked International women Day have escaped scrutiny. Many criticized businesses such as McDonalds as only paying lip service. The restaurant chain dominates one of the lowest paid industries in America, which is both dominated by women (65% of the workforce) and which pays women broadly less (median weekly earnings of just $370 for women, $413 for men). 
  Many thanks for all the contributions made so far to this blog. Keep them coming, Ill be looking below the line for more! 
  
 
 
  5.22pm GMT  
  
  Before I hand over our rolling coverage to Jessica Glenza, my colleague at Guardian US in New York, I wanted to share some of the incredible photographs of women on strike today in Spain  thanks to this commenter for the reminder. 
   
    
     
     s profile\">   
     
     
      
      s profile\" itemprop=\"url\"> MPPMLIbert  
      
      
      08 March 2018 5:02pm 
      
     
      I've just seen the photographs of the women marching in many cities in Spain, my country, and they look just wonderful. So many young girls, I'm happy to say. I wish I were there myself. The future is female!
      
     
    
   
   
   s Day at San Marcelo square in Leon, Spain.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
   
   
   s Day in Oviedo, Asturias, northern Spain.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
   
   
    
   
  More than 5m women are estimated to have taken part in Spains first nationwide feminist strike on Thursday, with the protestors slogan: If we stop, the world stops. 
  And with that, Jess is on with the blog ...  
  
 
 
  5.11pm GMT  
  
  For the International Day of the Girl in October last year, Beyonc lent her song Freedom to a campaign to achieve gender equality by 2030. Today, on International women Day, one of the writers credited on the song has spoken of the challenges she herself has faced in the music industry. 
   
    
   
  Carla Marie Williams, who co-wrote Freedom for Beyoncs widely-acclaimed Lemonade album, says women are held back in the male-dominated world of music, and called for more investment by record labels and publishers to bridge the gender gap. 
  Equality in the music industry definitely doesnt exist, its male-dominated through and through, the Brit-winning and Grammy-nominated writer told my colleague, Nadia Khomami. 
   
    Related: Music industry is still a boys' club, says Beyonc songwriter  
   
  The music industry has not escaped the spotlight being shone on sexism in the entertainment industry at large. At the end of last year, hundreds of female musicians in Australia published an open letter demanding zero tolerance for sexual harassment, violence, objectification and sexist behaviours. 
  Madonna and Grimes both recently expressed frustration with how their respective teams were handling their new material, interpreted as evidence of an industry that loves to sell the idea of female independence but does not like to enable it. 
  And last week, Kim Deal  of the Breeders and formerly the Pixies  spoke frankly about how far that discrimination went in the industry: Ive said before that misogyny is the actual backbone of the music industry, and without misogyny the music industry would crumble. 
  A Guardian analysis last year found that more than two-thirds of the live music acts that performed in the UK on one night in October were male-only, prompting many women working in music to offer their advice to others hoping to break in to the industry. 
  
 
 
  4.52pm GMT  
 McDonald's IWD stunt loses Momentum 
  
  McDonalds has flipped its iconic golden arches to become a W, in celebration of women everywhere, and for the first time in our brand history  to which many have responded, try again. 
  For its own commemoration of International women Day, McDonalds overturned its logo on Twitter, Instagram and its other digital channels; supplied 100 restaurants in the US with special branded garb; and  at one franchise in California  went so far as to install a new sign. 
   
   
    A @McDonalds in Lynwood, California has flipped its arches upside down in honour of #InternationalwomenDay on March 8th..!!  pic.twitter.com/BTQfDq4Ipq Muhammad Haris Tufail (@mhtufail_) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  McDonalds global chief diversity officer, Wendy Lewis, said in a statement to Business Insider that the stunt was in honour of the extraordinary accomplishments of women everywhere, and especially in our restaurants. 
  But her vow that the company was committed to their success was called into question by social media users who called on McDonalds to pay its employees a living wage. 
   
   
    McDonalds: In celebration of women we are flipping the arches upside down.Or you could give your employees better benefits.McD: Look it's a W!Maybe a living wage? Better family leave? A career path forward in the face of automation?McD: The W stands for women. bogwolf (@truebe) 
    March 7, 2018
    
   
   
   
    When I started using the term \"McFeminism\" to refer to the corporate-friendly, HRC fan sort of feminism, I didn't expect McDonalds to actually become one of the biggest examples of the phenomenon  Thorne Melcher  (@ExistentialEnso) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
   
   
    I THOUGHT THE UPSIDE DOWN MCDONALDS LOGO STOOD FOR WOLVES OR LIVABLE WAGES BUT YEAH THIS IS GOOD SURE FINE NOT A WOLF (@SICKOFWOLVES) 
    March 7, 2018
    
   
  In response to the campaign, Momentum put out a video highlighting how McDonalds low wages and zero-hours contracts meant some women workers faced poverty and homelessness. The videos, produced in collaboration with the Bakers Union, are in support of striking McDonalds workers. 
   
    
   
    Momentum tweeted the video with the question: Hey @McDonalds, instead of empty gestures like flipping your arches, how about improving working conditions for your women workers?
    
   
  This empty McFeminism has nothing to do with women liberation and everything to do with McDonalds attempt to sanitise its image, said Laura Parker, Momentums national coordinator. If they actually cared about women, theyd pay their workers a living wage and stop forcing them onto zero hours contracts. 
  Its completely unacceptable that zero hours contracts at McDonalds have left women workers without enough money to feed their children  and have even made some of them homeless. 
  
 
 
  4.34pm GMT  
  
  In Ireland, campaigners seeking to repeal the 8th Amendment are celebrating a historic and momentous step forward in their bid to allow access to abortion. 
  As reported by the Guardians Ireland correspondent, Henry McDonald, and Harriet Sherwood, the wording of a national referendum to overturn the constitutional ban on abortion was agreed by the cabinet on Thursday. 
  Ailbhe Smyth, the convenor of the Coalition to Repeal the 8th Amendment, welcomed the news as a significant milestone, well overdue. 
  It has been a very long time coming. ... We need abortion care that is safe and regulated, in line with best medical practice, and today brings us a crucial step forward in trying to achieve this important goal. 
  The referendum bill is being debated in parliament, with full details due to be published on Friday. 
  The campaign to repeal the 8th will ramp up in the weeks leading up to Mays referendum, with Orla OConnor of the National women Council indicating that it would be rooted in the experiences of women and girls and the type of healthcare services they need. 
   
    Related: Ireland's government approves bill paving way for abortion referendum  
   
  
 
 
  4.16pm GMT  
 Cyprus vows to 'close the gap' 
  
  Cyprus septugenarian president Nicos Anastasiades has pledged he will do whatever it takes to close the gap of gender inequality amid criticism over his failure to appoint more women to government office. 
  Every day steps of progress should be made for the gap to shrink and with each passing day our world to become fairer, said the conservative president in a tweet marking International women Day. His own efforts in this direction will be continuous, he vowed. 
  Anastasiades, who won a second presidential term in office last month, has been criticised for having only two women in his cabinet despite high anticipation that more would be appointed given the islands burgeoning population of highly qualified female professionals. 
  A former British colony, Cyprus is among the most patriarchal of EU member states. Most of the voters who abstained form casting ballots in the two-round presidential vote were women, pollsters say. In her own message to mark the day, the communications minister Vasiliki Anastasiadou, who was promoted to the post last month, said:  
  March 8 ... is a day of reflection because so much more has yet to be done until women gain the place they deserve in the whole spectrum of life, as equal members of our society. The women of Cyprus have achieved much. We can, however, do much more. 
  Religious leaders on the ethnically divided island also expressed concern at the the violence and discrimination women suffered on Cyprus. In a joint statement, the five [male] leaders representing the islands Greek Orthodox, Muslim, Armenian Orthodox, Maronites and Catholic communities, voiced consternation that violence against women and girls continues to be one of the most pervasive manifestations of discrimination against women in Cyprus. This includes economic, psychological, sexual and physical violence.  
  
 
 
  4.08pm GMT  
  
  Thanks, Alexandra  and hello, all. Thank you for following along with our coverage of International women Day 2018 thus far, and please keep your contributions coming below the line  thanks to Ruth for this comment about her late Mum, who didnt listen when she was told that ladies could only be nurses or teachers. 
   
    
     
     s profile\">   
     
     
      
      s profile\" itemprop=\"url\"> Ruth Ramsden  
      
      
      08 March 2018 3:56pm 
      
     
      I shall think of my mother, a talented artist and writer, she was prevented from following her dream to become an engineer, not by her father but by her mother, who insisted that 'ladies' could have only two careers - nursing or teaching - but that she might go to art college as that was quite 'suitable'. She ended up an engineering draughtsman and my favourite photograph of her shows her astride her Panther motorcycle in the early 1950s. I learned to ride on her old BSA Bantam. If she were still alive, she'd be 88. She went far too soon.
      
     
    
   
  
 Updated at 4.17pm GMT 
 
 
  3.39pm GMT  
  
  Thats all from me today, my colleague Elle Hunt will be taking over this liveblog shortly. Thank you all for your contributions!  
  
 Updated at 3.49pm GMT 
 
 
  3.19pm GMT  
 Mattel launches Inspiring Women collection on International Women's Day 
  
  I probably shouldnt like this so much, but I really want a Amelia Earhart Barbie.  
  The famously sexist Barbie doll maker Mattel (until 2016, remember, Barbie was a white women so stick-thin it was argued were she real she would not menstruate) has released a new batch of dolls inspired by modern-day women.  
  Role models include Olympic snowboarder Chloe Kim, record-breaking Wonder women director Patti Jenkins, conservationist Bindi Irwin and British professional boxer Nicola Adams Obe, reports InStyle. They join the existing Sheroes line which includes: Ashley Graham, Ava DuVernay, Gabby Douglas, and Misty Copeland. 
  Mattel also introduced its Inspiring Women collection, which focuses on historical figures including Amelia Earhart, Frida Kahlo, and NASA mathematician Katherine Johnson. 
   
   
    I will be drawing in eyebrows for my Frieda Barbie...Stephanie Escobar (@SFGeekGirl) 
    March 7, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  2.52pm GMT  
  
  Say what you like about Manchester (it rains all the time! it looks like the back of a fridge!*) but they do know how to pull off a decent marketing campaign.  
   
   
    Lou Cordwell, Founder &amp; CEO of @mNwork, talks to us about the womenchester campaign.Find out how to get involved here: #RadicalManchester #InternationalwomenDay #IWD2018 pic.twitter.com/3GcqO5enf5 Visit womenchester (@visit_mcr) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  Today, that involves renaming itself womenchester for the day, with lots of people getting on board using the hashtag #womenchester. 
  The name change is intended to remind people that Manchester was the home of suffragette leader Emmeline Pankhurst, and is the birthplace of progress and innovation. 
  Organisations and people supporting the name change include womenchester City, womenchester Airport and Greater womenchester Mayor Andy Burnham.  
  womenchester City also playing a blinder in bigging up the women game 
   
   
    .@klbardsley picks her inspirational women's 5-a-side squad! @serenawilliams and @Madonna make the list... Who else would you choose? #IWD2018 pic.twitter.com/pYANGMM32X womenchester City (@ManCity) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  *This is a joke, promise. I love Manchester. I have to or our north of England editor Helen Pidd would kill me.  
  
 Updated at 2.56pm GMT 
 
 
  2.45pm GMT  
 Comedian raises 72,000 and counting by telling Twitter the date of International Men's Day 
  
  One of the great joys of International women Day is tracking the progress of comedian Richard Herring, as he responds to every ill-informed Twitter user asking if there is an International Mens Day (there is, its November 19th).  
  This year hes cannily using the enjoyment many people get from his sterling efforts to rise money for domestic violence charity Refuge. And has so far raised 72,000 and counting ... 
   
   
    Youd think so wouldnt you? But maybe youre the first person to think of this. Shall we google it together now and see? Richard K Herring (@Herring1967) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
   
   
    Always best to have a guess rather than do any research. But you guessed wrong and must now pay 5 here - have 11 more guesses. Use them wisely. Richard K Herring (@Herring1967) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  2.35pm GMT  
 Report: Women in prison in worse health than men 
  
  To coincide with International women Day, Public Health England has released a report looking at the health of women in prisons, which unsurprisingly concludes that acceptable standards are not currently being met, reports my colleague Frances Perraudin.  
  The report recognises that people in prison are typically in poorer health than the rest of the population, but notes that women prisoners are often in a worse condition than their male counterparts. 65% of women in prison suffer from depression compared to 37% of men. Despite representing just 5% of the prison population, women account for 23% of all self-harm incidents in prison. 
  A blogpost on the PHE website reads:  
   
   Historically, prisons have almost invariably been designed for the majority male prison population  from the architecture of prisons, to security procedures, to healthcare, family contact, work and training. 
   53% of women in prison report having experienced emotional, physical or sexual abuse during childhood and 41% of prisoners say they observed violence at home as a child. These negative childhood experiences can have a profound impact on women health outcomes and their offending behaviour.  
   Women also tend to have roles as parents or primary care givers in families, meaning time in prison no only impacts on them but on their families and the people they look after, it adds. Between 24% and 31% of all women in prison have one or more child dependents. 
   
  Commenting on the report, Eytan Alexander, CEO at UK Addiction Treatment (UKAT), said the report showed there was still a way to go until standards are where they should be. We have treated women where abuse has played a part in their lives, and where theyve either experienced prison themselves, or have been affected by a family member in prison, he said.  
  The impact reverberates across the family and its important that if a women is incarcerated, that the root cause is addressed in order to avoid future offences and substance abuse. 
  
 
 
  2.30pm GMT  
 More than 50 countries organise Wikipedia edit-a-thons 
  
   
   
    On Int women Day, more than 50 countries organized #Wikipedia edit-a-thons in partnership with @SweMFA to make the internet more gender equal. UN Women in Georgia, Kosovo and @unwomenbih support the action to close the #Wikigap. #TimeIsNow #IWD2018 pic.twitter.com/6J9NkDlkGd UN Women Europe &amp;CIS (@unwomeneca) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  UN Women have been tweeting about the global #WikiGap event, organised in partnership with the Swedish Foreign ministry. The idea is to get more women contributing to the website, to address the gender imbalance on the worlds largest online and user-generated encyclopaedia. The Swedish foreign ministry states: 
   
   Knowledge is power, and Wikipedia has the potential to colour our view of the world. But there is great imbalance between men and women on the website, like in society at large. 
   Ninety per cent of those who add content to Wikipedia are men. There are four times more articles about men than women. The figures vary regionally, but no matter how you look at it, the picture is clear: the information about women is less extensive than that about men. Regardless of which language version of Wikipedia you read. We want to change this. 
   #WikiGap is an event during which people around the world will gather to add more content to Wikipedia about women figures, experts and role models in various fields. On 8 March  International women Day  the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Swedish embassies will host simultaneous events in more than 50 countries, from Sweden to Tanzania, Egypt and Colombia. 
   Sweden is the first country in the world to pursue a feminist foreign policy. We do this based on the conviction that gender equality is fair and right, and because it is a basic condition for sustainable peace and security. 
   
  
 
 
  2.22pm GMT  
  
  The New York Times is doing something pretty cool.  
   
   
    Since 1851, obituaries in The New York Times have been dominated by white men. Now, we're adding the stories of 15 remarkable women. The New York Times (@nytimes) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  It is using International women Day to launch Overlooked, a project to write the obituaries of the people who never received them. 
  Its starting with 15 obituaries of women today, including prominent British women Lillias Campbell Davidson, Charlotte Bronte and Ada Lovelace. 
  The NYT will continue to publish the obituaries throughout this year, expanding to include others who were overlooked, especially people of colour, with new obituaries published every week, they said. 
  
 
 
  1.40pm GMT  
  
  Women are marching all around the world today. Here are some photos: 
   
   s Day in Pristina.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Kosovars march to mark International women Day in Pristina. 
    Photograph: Valdrin Xhemaj/EPA 
    
   
   
    
    
    A young women wearing a pink wig takes part in a rally, demonstrating against gender violence and calling for gender parity in Milan, Italy. 
    Photograph: Emanuele Cremaschi/Getty Images 
    
   
   
   s day at Kawangware in Nairobi, Kenya.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Members of Kenya Girl Guides take photos after attending ceremony of the International women day at Kawangware in Nairobi, Kenya. 
    Photograph: Yasuyoshi Chiba/AFP/Getty Images 
    
   
   
   s Day in Ankara, Turkey.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Women sing and dance during a gathering to celebrate International women Day in Ankara, Turkey. 
    Photograph: Adem Altan/AFP/Getty Images 
    
   
   
   s Day in Kiev.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Ukrainian feminists celebrate International women Day in Kiev. 
    Photograph: Sergey Dolzhenko/EPA 
    
   
  
 
 
  1.19pm GMT  
 Women in Yarl's Wood continue hunger strike on International Women's Day 
  
  More than 100 female detainees at the Yarls Wood detention centre are continuing their hunger strike, with more than 500 people also fasting to show solidarity with their cause.  
   
   
    Share the Yarls Wood strikers demands! #TheseWallsMustFall #HungerForFreedom #FreedomFast pic.twitter.com/b5SHGsGpXW MigrantConnections (@MigrantConnect) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  A women who gave her name as Afiya in a statement, said in a statement.  
   
   We wish we could be celebrating with you on this day, but we are not free to do so. It is true that women have made much progress in the past century since the suffragettes won the right for some women to vote, but a hundred years does not negate an entire history of women being treated at best as inferior and at worst as property. We have a long way to go. Today we celebrate what has been achieved, but we cannot take for granted the rights and freedoms that have been won. We women here in Yarls Wood did not anticipate our freedom would be taken from us or the impact it would have. We are on a hunger strike because we are suffering unfair imprisonment and racist abuse in this archaic institution in Britain. This is a desperate measure due to desperate circumstances. We feel voiceless, forgotten and ignored. We need a voice and more importantly we need someone to listen. 
   
   Diane Abbott MP, Shadow Home Secretary, said: 
   
    Refugee and migrant women are often struggling to be heard. They can and do make such a great contribution to this country, but also face some very grave challenges. Im glad to support their campaigns for greater liberty, dignity and safety. Its time for us in Parliament to ensure that this centenary year for women suffrage is about listening to and including all women, especially those who have been historically marginalised from British politics. 
   
  Marchu Girma, grassroots director at Women for Refugee Women, said: 
   
   A century on from women getting the vote, there are some women in our society whose voices are still unheard. For far too long refugee and migrant women have gone unheard, and now we are now asking for our needs to safety, dignity, liberty to be met. We believe all women count. 
   
  
 
 
  1.01pm GMT  
  
   
    Related: Settling the score: celebrating the women erased from the musical canon  
   
  
 
 
  12.53pm GMT  
 The Syrian female doctor challenging the patriarchy, even in war 
  
  This is a really powerful and inspiring video featuring Dr Amani Ballour who is committed to challenging gender stereotypes in war-torn east Ghouta.  
  I believe we as women can change this reality, she says.  
   
    
    
     
    
    
   
  
 Updated at 12.56pm GMT 
 
 
  12.45pm GMT  
 France marks International Women's Day 
  
  French president Emmanuel Macron visited a Paris-based property business on Thursday morning and declared it to be exemplary in matters of professional equality between men and women. The company, Gcina, employs almost 500 people. The visit came as the French government draws up measures to boost gender equality in and outside the workplace after its Tour de France consultative exercise that led to around 50 suggestions. 
  French daily newspaper Libration made male readers pay 50 centimes more than female readers to mark International women Day. In the cities of Perpignon and Strasbourg, feminists and supporters renamed streets after women. Only 2% of French roads carry women names. 
  In France, research from the Inequality Observatory shows women still earn on average 24% less than men for the same work. A group of associations and unions have called on workers, male and female, to stop working at 15.40 today, the time when women could be considered to be working for free given the pay gap. 
  
 
 
  12.39pm GMT  
 GuardianWitness - What are you doing this International Women's Day? 
  
   
   s Day\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Disability rights groups meet in Nairobi on International womens Day 
    Photograph: GuardianWitness 
    
   
  Lisa, 43, Nairobi, Kenya 
  Women with disabilities from different countries in Africa are meeting today in Nairobi to strategise for change to end violence against women and girls with disabilities. We are exchanging our experiences and good practices to promote progress and end systemic gender-based violence.  
  We want to tell the world and in particular, women rights activists that women with disabilities are women first! To governments, multilateral and bilateral agencies and donors, women with disabilities are making progress around the world. 
  Monika Radojevic, 22, London 
  Im going in to speak to years 5 and 6 at Kenmont Primary School about three important lessons that three important women have taught me. Ill be speaking about Michelle Obama who taught me to dream big and shout loud, my own mother who taught me to be kind, and Mexican artist Frida Khalo whos love for life despite her pain taught me to love myself more.  
  I hope most of all that young children are inspired by other powerful women to have big dreams of their own.  
  Catherine Sealys, 51, Saint Lucia 
  This year women are excited, they are ready, they are motivated and they have been educated by the me too and Times Up Movement. And they are ready to come out and make a difference.  
  Our organisation Raise Your Voice Saint Lucia will be hosting a march to call on the government of Saint Lucia. We want to send a strong message to our legislators that the time is now to make amendments to existing legislation and enact new laws to protect women and children as the law stands we are legally victimising our women and children, specifically those who are in common law relationships and children born into a common law relationship.  
  
 
 
  12.23pm GMT  
 Mary Barbour statue unveiled in Glasgow 
  
  A statue of rent strike heroine Mary Barbour has been unveiled today in Glasgows Govan following a long-running fund-raising campaign.  
  Barbour was a central figure in the Glasgow rent strikes of 1915, coming to national notice when she formed eviction resistance groups of women which were described as Mary Barbours Army, and remains one of Scotlands most beloved women activists. 
  The statue was commissioned after 100,000 was raised by campaigners, led by former Labour MP Maria Fyfe and depicts Barbour on the day she led a 20,000-strong march for tenants rights through the streets of the city. Standing for the Labour Party, Barbour went on to become on of Glasgows first women councillors.  
   
   
    Delighted that Mary Barbour will be honoured with a statue in Govan and that it will be unveiled on #IWD2018 - unfortunately due to #FMQs I cant be there in person but look forward to seeing it very soon. Nicola Sturgeon (@NicolaSturgeon) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  12.18pm GMT  
  
   
    Related: Tate artist in residence quits, claiming gallery is failing women  
   
  
 
 
  12.11pm GMT  
 Sisterly #FMQs in Holyrood today 
  
   
   
    Nicola Sturgeon &amp; Ruth Davidson begin todays #FMQs by noting #IWD2018 &amp; pledging to ensure the next generation of women have fewer battles to fight pic.twitter.com/vmN0xJP4wD Libby Brooks (@libby_brooks) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  12.10pm GMT  
 Female solicitors now outnumber men 
  
  The Law Society has revealed that the number of female solicitors practising in England and Wales now outnumbers men for the first time ever, my colleague Owen Bowcott reports. The figures have emerged on International women Day along with a survey of members which shows that 91% of those consulted believe that more flexible working would help improve diversity in the profession. 
  The newly released Law Society figures show that there are now 69,995 practising female solicitors in England and Wales, making up 50.1% of the 139, 624 total. There are fewer men: 69,629, amounting to 49.9%. 
  While the overall number of female solicitors has overtaken men, the senior ranks in most law firms are still dominated by male partners - showing that there is further to travel on the road to gender equality in the legal profession.As women solicitors practising in England and Wales outnumber men for the first time in history, people working in law ... have spoken out about the challenges the profession faces in achieving gender equality, the Law Societys vice president, Christina Blacklaws, said.While more and more women are becoming lawyers, this shift is not yet reflected at more senior levels in the profession. Our survey and a wider programme of work ... seeks to understand progress, barriers and support remedies. Unconscious bias in the legal profession is the most commonly identified barrier to career progression for women, while flexible working is seen as a remedy by an overwhelming 91% of respondents to our survey.Interestingly, while half of all respondents said they thought there had been progress on gender equality over the last five years, there was a significant difference in perception by gender with 74% of men reporting progress in gender equality compared to only 48% of women.The Law Society survey, answered by nearly 8,000 solicitors, recorded only 11% of respondents saying that unconscious bias training was carried out consistently in their organisation. Almost half (49%) said that the work/life balance required in order to reach senior levels was unacceptable.Nearly two-thirds (60%) said they were aware of a gender pay gap in their place of work and approaching half (46%) said that traditional networks/routes to promotion were male orientated. 
  
 Updated at 12.41pm GMT 
 
 
  11.59am GMT  
  
  Gatwick Express honours women in announcements to mark IWD 
   
    
    
     
    
    
   
  
 
 
  11.55am GMT  
 Greece lagging behind in gender equality 
  
  Europe has worked hard to eradicate gender inequality  promoting gender mainstreaming in all EU policies and those of member states  but countries like Greece still have a long way to go, writes my colleague Helena Smith.  
  Sixty six years may have elapsed since Greece got its first women MP, but in terms of gender equality the country still lags at the bottom of league tables Europe wide. 
  In contrast to Sweden which came in with 82.6 points, topping the latest study put out by the European Institute for gender equality, Greece scored a mere 50 points and came in last. In terms of equal pay, access to financial resources, education, household work and time devoted to it, decision-making and health, the country trailed its counterparts. 
  But the pay gap does seem to be closing according to figures released by Eurostat on the eve of International women day. The difference between average gross hourly earnings of male and female employees (as a percentage of male gross earnings) fell to 12.5 percent in 2014  the last year for which figures were available. In 2010 it stood at 15 percent. 
  
 
 
  11.46am GMT  
 International Women's Day flag flies for the first time over parliament 
  
   
   s Days flag that will fly over parliament for the first time today\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Dawn Butler MP, Shadow Equalities Minister and John Bercow, the Speaker of the House of Commons with the International women Days flag that will fly over parliament for the first time today 
    Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
    
   
  An International women Day flag is flying over parliament for the first time on Thursday, as MPs and peers mark the day with a debate in both Houses of Parliament. 
  Labours shadow equalities minister Dawn Butler said she had been inspired by the flag flying over the Transport for London building on Monday and had approached Speaker John Bercow to see if the flag could be flown in parliament. Bercow signed off the plan with less than 24 hours to go before IWD. 
  Bercow said the flag would remind us of what has been achieved and how far their is to go to achieve full gender equality and said it was an initiative supported by MPs from all parties as the House commemorated 100 years of the first women getting the vote. 
  This is very much a cross-party initiative, this is a cause dear to all their hearts, he said. Whilst rejoicing in all the great things brought about by the Pankhursts, by Emily Wilding-Davison, by Millicent Fawcett, and indeed by modern campaigners, we must not sit smugly and think job done, there are still issues of unequal access to the labour market, occupational segregation, women and members of minority groups scaling the heights professionally, there is a substantial gender pay gap. 
  
 
 
  11.42am GMT  
 Susan Sarandon reveals Paul Newman shared salary to close pay gap 
  
  If you needed another reason to admire the late Paul Newman (and really, does anyone?) the Press Association has supplied it, reporting that the actor gave Susan Sarandon part of his payment on the new-noir thriller Twilight to close the films gender pay gap.  
  Joe Nerssessian, of the Press Association reports: 
   
   Hollywood actor Paul Newman once gave up a portion of his salary to top-up co-star Susan Sarandons lower fee, the actress has revealed.  
   The pair worked together on 1998 neo-noir thriller Twilight, which also starred Gene Hackman and Reese Witherspoon.  
   After the negotiation term Favoured Nation - which ensures each actor in a film is paid the same as their co-stars - was only applied to the two men in the film, Newman volunteered some of his fee.  
   Sarandon told BBC Radio 5 Live: Emma Stone once came forward and said she got equal pay because her male stars insisted upon it and gave up something of theirs. That happened to me with Paul Newman at one point, when I did a film with him ages ago.  
   She added Newman had stepped forward and said Well, Ill give you part of mine. So yeah - he was a gem.  
   The actress, 71, also said she believes there will always be a casting couch in Hollywood.  
   I think what will go away is the unwanted exchange, but I think that giving yourself sexually, or being drawn to power and wanting to have sex with someone thats in power is also a choice.  
   What we dont want to have is being exploited and to have the Harvey Weinsteins of the world holding it over your head and holding it over your project - that is the most despicable.  
   Newman died aged 83 in 2008. 
   
  
 
 
  11.10am GMT  
  
   
   
    International women day video from Iran: pic.twitter.com/BKB2lP4vf1 Saeed Kamali Dehghan (@SaeedKD) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  11.09am GMT  
 Rename House of Lords, say Liberal Democrats 
  
  The Lib Dems are calling on Parliament to rename the House of Lords the House of Peers to better reflect the role women play in the upper chamber, the party said todayThe bill, being laid in the House today by Liberal Democrat MP Christine Jardine, will highlight the fact that the House of Lords is a gendered title and put the issue on the legislative agenda for the rest of the parliament Christine Jardine said: 
   
   The current gender-specific House of Lords title is no longer appropriate. It feeds into an outdated and unacceptable narrative that political decision-making is a mans job. 
   In this centenary year of female voting and election rights, it is surely time to recognise that our upper chamber is not a male preserve. 
   
  
 
 
  11.03am GMT  
  
   
    Related: Why were striking for women rights today | Iida Kyhk, Frankie Mullin, Susana Benavides and Rosie Ferguson  
   
  
 
 
  10.51am GMT  
  
  A group that supports women rights using music influenced by Ethiopian heritage is thriving  despite losing UK aid funding, writes Claudine Spera 
   
    Related: 'By Ethiopians, for Ethiopians': girl band Yegna shake off Spice Girls tag | Claudine Spera  
   
  You can watch the amazing Yegna in action in this film: 
   
    
    
     
    
    
   
  
 
 
  10.48am GMT  
 Protester arrested at the Department of Health and Social Care, say Women's Strike UK 
  
   
   
    Blockade outside the Department of Health and Social Care. We want trans health in trans hands - now! #womentrike2018 #WeStrike pic.twitter.com/lyJim9jjTM Women's Strike (@Women_Strike) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  A protester who was taking part in an women Strike UK action at the Department of Health and Social Care has been arrested, the group says.  
  According to the group: 
   
   Trans women and their allies were peacefully protesting the Department of Health this morning to call urgent attention to the failings in the provision of healthcare for trans people. 
   
  The group added: 
   
   2K people will meet at 1pm in Russell Square, Bloomsbury, London  
   61 University campuses across UK are on strike 
   Actions in 7 cities - London, Birmingham, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Derry and Brighton 
   The UK will be one of 56 countries on strike.  
   
  Noshin Salari Rad, one of the organisers of the strike said: 
   
   Thursday is about solidarity between all women trans women, women of colour, indigenous, working class, disabled, migrant, sex workers, Muslim, lesbian and queer. 
   
  
 
 
  10.21am GMT  
 Women in Sport 
  
  My colleague Anna Kessel has just informed me what Id rather be doing today (Im joking of course, what else would I rather do then liveblog IWD???) 
  A groundbreaking women football history conference aims to blow apart perceptions of the sport is kicking off at the National Football Museum in Manchester today.  
  Anna writes: 
   
   The two-day conference, which begins on International women Day, hosts academics, journalists and artists from around the globe. Lectures range from the acclaimed writer and sports activist Shireen Ahmed discussing football and the hijab, to a study on women and the 1966 mens World Cup from Professor John Hughson. 
   
   
    Related: Groundbreaking women football conference highlights buried stories | Anna Kessel  
   
  If you are unfortunate enough to be an Evertonian like me, its worth a glance for the pictures of Elaine Shaw and friends on their trip to Rotterdam to see Everton play the 1985 Cup Winners Cup final.  
  
 
 
  10.08am GMT  
 Music 
  
  The great thing about International women Day is that is shines a light on institutional sexism is all sorts of areas.  
  Culture - both high and low - remains hugely dominated by men, and nowhere is that more evident that in the classical music sphere. Which is why its great to see movement by some institutions to address the glaring inequality.  
  Music college Trinity Laban has used International women Day to pledgs that music by women  past and present and across many genres - will make up more than half of its concert programmes in 2018/19 academic year.  
   
   
    We are thrilled to announce on #InternationalwomenDay Venus Blazing, a celebration of female composers: #VenusBlazing pic.twitter.com/pNLQWlGK2S Trinity Laban (@TrinityLaban) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  Harriet Harman MP, Chair of Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music &amp; Dance, is launching Venus Blazing at a lunchtime concert by Trinity Labans Chamber Choir celebrating the 90th birthday of British composer Thea Musgrave, at 1pm in Greenwich today.  
  She said: 
   
   Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music &amp; Dance is strongly committed to diversity in all elements and it has a mission to constantly challenge the status quo. Venus Blazing is a great example of just how it can do this. It will encourage and inspire its students  many of whom will go on to shape the future of the performing arts  to engage with the historic issue of gender imbalance in music by women, and ensure that it does not continue into the next generation. I welcome this bold initiative to raise awareness of the disparity that has long existed in music and shine a light on music that has so frequently been overlooked. I am also greatly looking forward to hearing some of the musical treasures by women I might not otherwise have had the chance to hear. 
   
   
   
    A group of trailblazing academics has spent the last 12 months tracking down the lost music of five forgotten women composers.BBC Radio 3 (@BBCRadio3) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  Radio 3 are also putting in a shift - joining forces with academics to bring to light the work of five forgotten women composers.  
  
 
 
  10.02am GMT  
 Labour would punish firms for not closing the gender pay gap 
  
  This Comment piece from Dawn Butler, shadow Women &amp; Equalities secretary, is very much worth a read.  
   
    Related: Firms underpaying women should be fined. Under Labour they will be | Dawn Butler  
   
  It can be read alongside the Guardians story here: 
   
    Related: Labour would punish firms for not closing gender pay gaps  
   
  
 
 
  9.47am GMT  
 A New Normal 
  
  My colleague Lucy Lamble has been at the London School of Economics in London this morning, where Danish development cooperation minister, Ulla Trns, one of the people who set up the She Decides movement in response to Trumps Global Gag rule, has called for a new normal in the face of pushbacks to women rights over their sexual and reproductive rights:  
   
   International women is a day to celebrate the incredible journey millions of women and girls around the world have taken. A journey towards a life in dignity, with equal opportunities, freedom and prosperity. [A hundred years ago, for the first time the British Parliament passed an act granting most women  yet not all  the right to vote. Look at you now. What a long way we have come.  
    But the journey is far from over. For many girls and women, the journey has not yet even started.] In several parts of the world, gender equality and women enjoyment of human rights is but a distant hope. And women rights are even under increasing pressure. Various conservative and religious movements globally are adding pressure. This needs to change. We cannot, and should not, accept the setbacks we now see. All of us have a responsibility to act. To stand up and fight for those millions of girls and women, who do not enjoy the same fundamental human rights as we do. 
   Last week in Pretoria, Denmark and South Africa co-hosted the first SheDecides-one-year-on -conference with a special focus on youth. In Pretoria, representatives from governments, parliaments, civil society, bright academics, and  notably  young people from North and South, all committed to stand up collectively to a vision of a New Normal. A New Normal where women and girls can decide freely about their own bodies. Their own lives. And their own futures. Where SheDecides. Without question. 
   Action is needed for women and girls - but really to the benefit of us ALL. 
   
   
   
    I have always understood equality as not about demanding more, but rather being entitled to the same. LSE Director Minouche Shafik is first in our series of inspiring #LSEwomen launching this #InternationalwomenDay #IWD #IWD2018 pic.twitter.com/IVmb2t2Enq LSE (@LSEnews) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  9.40am GMT  
 Empty desks at El Pais 
  
  Spanish newspaper El Pais has posted this rather cool little video, explaining that they are not fully staffed today because of the women strike.  
   
   
    En la redaccin de EL PAS, hoy no estamos todos #LasPeriodistasParamos #Huelga8Marzo #womenDay pic.twitter.com/mcbSkjcMKK EL PAS (@el_pais) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  And showing the empty desks of female journalists who have not come into work today. Qu bueno ! 
  
 
 
  9.37am GMT  
 Cut price news for French mesdames 
  
  This is rather cute from French left-leaning newspaper Libration 
   
   
    A la (double) une de @libe jeudi 8 mars : contre les ingalits salariales... deux prix pic.twitter.com/vW92tA7wip Libration (@libe) 
    March 7, 2018
    
   
  To draw attention to the gender pay gap in France, which is 25% according to the paper, they are selling todays edition at two different prices. Women get a 25% discount at the newsstand. Bravo!  
  
 
 
  9.24am GMT  
 Women's Strike UK 
  
  If you fancy getting involved in some radical action in the UK today, its worth taking a look at this Facebook post from the women Strike Assembly - UK and following @Women_Strike 
   
   
    Today #WeStrike! Wear red, bring an umbrella &amp; join us! Share your reasons for striking #WhyIStrikeSee you on the streets!For more info: // pic.twitter.com/Z56fvBLNpA Women's Strike (@Women_Strike) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 9.33am GMT 
 
 
  9.09am GMT  
 Seoras in Spain showing the world how it's done 
  
  Women in Spain are taking part in the countys first nationwide feminist strike to mark International women Day, reports Sam Jones in Madrid. Some are downing tools for the whole day, while others are stopping for a two-hour stretch (from 11.30 to 13.30 or from 16.00 to 18.00). 
   
   
    #Spanish women give up work for a day in first 'feminist strike' #huelga8marzo Sam Jones (@swajones) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  But the action goes beyond the traditional workplace: women are also being encouraged to abandon their unpaid work - such as cleaning, social care and child care - to show how unfairly these tasks are distributed. 
  There are also signs of more direct action in Catalonia, with protesters occupying streets in Barcelona, shutting down a railway line out of the Catalan capital and blocking a road between Barcelona and the town of Manresa. Protests are due to be held later today in cities across Spain. 
  Protests are also under way in Madrid, with workers and students picketing the citys Complutense university. Some prominent Spanish journalists are absent from news websites, radio and TV programmes today as they, too are on strike. Spains health, social services and equality minister, Dolors Montserrat, has described todays action as a social revolution for men and women, but stressed that it isnt a war between the sexes. Montserrat told the Espejo Pblico programme that while she was pleased to see so many women exercising their right to protest, it was up to individual women to decide how they want to strike or whether they wished to go to work as normal. 
  
 Updated at 9.16am GMT 
 
 
  8.52am GMT  
 Happy International Women's Day from London! 
  
  Good morning and happy International women Day! I hope all our readers have had a decent breakfast this morning - because weve got an awful lot of patriarchy smashing to get through.  
  Huge thanks to the powerhouse that is Claire Phipps in Sydney - it is so exciting to hear of the manifold ways people are marking IWD around the globe.  
  On that note - what are YOU doing to mark the day? Id love to hear what IWD means to you, and what action you are taking. Get in touch via the Guardian Witness button at the top to share your stories or tweet me at @lexytopping.  
  
 
 
  8.34am GMT  
  
  Its time for me to hand over the live blog to my colleague Alexandra Topping, wholl take you through the next part of International women Day as it rolls across the globe. 
  The mood this year feels different. Real change is underway: women in Saudi Arabia can now drive, or go to sports matches. Milestones have been reached: its 100 years since (partial) women suffrage in the UK. There are loud conversations around harassment, pay inequality and more. Times Up and #MeToo have edged beyond hashtags into palpable anger and hunger for action. 
  In other ways, though, it feels as if little has changed. A man who bragged about grabbing women by the pussy sits in the Oval Office. A prime minister is asked in a TV interview when she conceived her unborn child. Women still routinely face sexual harassment at work. Reported cases of female genital mutilation continue to rise. 
  Do get in touch to share whats going on where you are: via the comments below, to Guardian Witness here or via the button at the top of the blog. And thank you for reading. 
  
 
 
  8.28am GMT  
 Mary McAleese: 'Catholic church an empire of misogyny' 
  
  The Catholic church is an empire of misogyny, the former Irish president Mary McAleese has said ahead of a conference in Rome calling for women to be given leadership roles by the Vatican. 
  The Catholic church is one of the last great bastions of misogyny. Its an empire of misogyny, McAleese told reporters. 
  There are so few leadership roles currently available to women. Women do not have strong role models in the church they can look up to. 
  She said a church hierarchy that was homophobic and anti-abortion is not the church of the future. 
  McAleese, a keynote speaker at the Voices of Faith conference, was refused approval by the Vatican, forcing organisers to relocate the event to another venue in Rome. No reason was given for the refusal, but McAleese is a vocal advocate for women and LGBT rights. 
  Two other women invited to speak at the event were also refused Vatican accreditation. 
  Chantal Goetz, one of the conference organisers, said: We feel we have reached a crisis point. Young people leave the church in alarming numbers. We watch the exodus of talented, educated young women. 
  
 
 
  8.21am GMT  
  
  Speaking of strikes, heres Ada Colau, mayor of Barcelona, on why she is joining the nationwide feminist strike in Spain today: 
   
   To show that without women the world really does stop  
   As people in public positions, we have the duty to mobilise on behalf of those who cant go on strike. This is the century of women and of feminism; weve raised our voices and we wont stop. 
   No more violence, discrimination or pay gap! 
   
  
 
 
  8.13am GMT  
  
  On the first day of the UN Decade for Women in 1975, the women of Iceland took the day off to demonstrate the importance of all their work, waged and unwaged, in the countryside and the city. Almost all women who were physically able came out of their homes, offices and factories, and even female television presenters were replaced on the screen by men holding children. Some 90% of women took part. 
  They called it a day off but we at the International Wages for Housework Campaign called it a strike, and took as our slogan their placard which said: When women stop, everything stops  
  But how can you strike if you cant risk being sacked or endangering those you care for? This has always been the dilemma, especially of the carer on whom vulnerable people depend. In countries such as Spain, where there is general recognition of the strike validity and even union backing, its easier for women to walk out for at least part of the day  hundreds of thousands are expected to do just that. 
  Where such support is not yet forthcoming, women can still publicise our situation and what we want changed in call-ins and letters to the press, returning from lunch even 10 minutes late, banging pots in the streets or at the window, as women in Spain did against the 2003 Iraq war. 
   
    Related: Decades after Icelands day off, our women strike is stronger than ever | Selma James  
   
  
 
 
  8.02am GMT  
  
  New figures from the TUC published today show that women in the UK effectively work the first 67 days of the year for no pay, thanks to the gender pay gap. 
  When all workers, full and part-time, are included, the pay gap is 18.4%. But in education, its 26.5%, meaning it will be 7 April before the average female worker in the sector is earning the same as the average male worker. 
   
    Related: Gender pay gap means women work 67 days a year for free, says TUC  
   
  
 
 
  7.51am GMT  
  
  Hundreds of South Koreans are staging a protest in support of the #MeToo movement on International women Day, Associated Press reports. 
  Protesters, many wearing black and holding black signs reading #MeToo, gathered in central Seoul. They called for bringing alleged sexual offenders to justice, as well as action on other issues such as closing a gender pay gap. 
  Since a female prosecutors revelation in January of workplace mistreatment and sexual misconduct, South Koreas #MeToo movement has gained major traction. The list of women who speak out is growing daily. 
  Several high-profile men have resigned from positions of power, including a governor who was a leading presidential contender before he was accused of repeatedly raping his secretary. 
   
    
    
     
    
    
   
  
 Updated at 10.18am GMT 
 
 
  7.40am GMT  
  
  Heres British PM Theresa Mays message for International women Day in which she flags many of the prominent women now in positions of power in the UK, 100 years after some women won the right to vote. 
  May has also written for the Guardian today setting out details of the governments new domestic violence bill, which will extend the definition to include financial abuse, and proposes electronically tagging those suspected of abuse. 
   
   
    On International women Day, I am proud to serve as Britains second female Prime Minister alongside so many other women in vital public positions #IWD2018 pic.twitter.com/VMLBOmemsJ UK Prime Minister (@10DowningStreet) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  7.28am GMT  
  
  More than a thousand female aid workers from around the world have signed an open letter calling for urgent reform across the humanitarian sector, reports Rebecca Ratcliffe: 
   
    The letter, addressed to the leaders of international charities, the UN and donors, urges organisations to treat allegations of sexual harassment and abuse as a priority. Whistleblowers must be listened to and protected, said the signatories.  
   Trust in our sector can only be restored when we ask and answer the difficult questions and openly challenge those who exploit and hide behind the good work of many, read the letter, which has the backing of 1,111 female aid workers from 81 different countries. It is the behaviour of these men, not our complaint of their behaviour, which damages the sectors reputation and public trust. 
   The aid sector is reeling from allegations that charities including Oxfam, Save the Children and the UN mishandled claims of sexual misconduct. At a summit in London this week, the international development secretary, Penny Mordaunt, described the revelations as a wake-up call for the sector, and called on delegates to establish an independent body to ensure standards and scrutiny. 
   Thursdays letter warns of the need for action rather than words. We are gravely concerned that the culture of silence, intimidation and abuse will continue as soon as the media spotlight on this issue begins to dim, said the signatories. We need effective leadership, commitment to action and access to resources. 
   
   
    Related: 'You need to hear us': over 1,000 female aid workers urge reform in open letter  
   
  
 
 
  7.17am GMT  
  
  8 March is also, of course, International Richard Herring Telling People On The Internet When International Mens Day Is Day. 
  The comedian has for several years sought out commenters who  unable to access Google or other search engines  put out an online plea on International women Day: Whens International Mens Day, then? 
  The answer, as Herring cheerfully reminds them all on Twitter, is 19 November. 
  This year, to add extra warmth to his mission, Herring is raising money for Refuge, which supports women and girls who have experienced domestic violence. Heres his fundraising page, should you want to spur him on. 
   
   
    One year, I will redouble my efforts and set up a scheduled tweet to everyone I respond to, for November 19th saying `remember that thing you were so worried about. Its today! What are you doing to celebrate?\" Richard K Herring (@Herring1967) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  7.08am GMT  
  
  Today the Irish government will publish details of the forthcoming referendum on a repeal of the abortion ban: 
  The gathering momentum among the Irish public and its countrys politicians for liberalisation of abortion rights says much about the culture wars. It tells us they are winnable and that minds can be changed. It shows us how to campaign and reminds us that female autonomy is always in jeopardy  that the goal of every fundamentalist in a culture war is to strip the female body of autonomy, be it through virginity tests or restricting access to contraception or safe legal abortion. It is worth noting that Northern Irelands Democratic Unionist party, propping up the government, is also fundamentally anti-choice  
  There are so many brutal stories, I dont need to tell them, from women who cannot have cancer treatment because they are pregnant, to the everyday ones of women begging money from friends for the price of a Ryanair flight. I have been chanting Get your rosaries off my ovaries all my adult life. Friends in Ireland have distributed information about abortion every way they could, for at one point even the dissemination of information was criminalised. Now a diverse young population free of the Catholic church is coming to power. What has been especially significant is that this is a once-taboo issue on which politicians have changed their minds in public. A changing demographic forces change. The popular vote in favour of gay marriage showed that demographic that they could do just that. 
   
    Related: Irelands abortion battle shows we must never let the fundamentalists win | Suzanne Moore  
   
  
 
 
  6.59am GMT  
  
  Despite the conversational shifts weve seen in 2018, in plenty of ways it feels as if little has changed for women: 
   
   An Iranian women who publicly removed her veil in protest against Irans compulsory headscarf law has been sentenced to two years in prison, the judiciary said on Wednesday. 
   Tehrans chief prosecutor, Abbas Jafari Dolatabadi, who announced the sentence, did not give the womens identity but said she intended to appeal against the verdict, the judiciarys Mizan Online news agency reported. 
   Dolatabadi said the unidentified women took off her headscarf in Tehrans Enghelab Street to encourage corruption through the removal of the hijab in public. 
   More than 30 Iranian women have been arrested since the end of December for publicly removing their veils in defiance of the law. 
   
   
    Related: Iranian women who removed headscarf jailed for two years  
   
  
 
 
  6.50am GMT  
  
  Demands for an end to violence against women, equality in the workplace and more diverse representation in positions of power are nothing new on International women Day  the cry for change is as regular as the day itself. But this year, feminists argue, could be different: people may just be listening. 
  Since sexual harassment scandals tore through Hollywood last October, the repercussions keep on coming. In multiple workplaces, across unrelated fields, we are starting to see what change might look like. 
  At the start of the year 300 Hollywood employees, including many high-profile stars, launched the Times Up legal fund to support women fighting sexual misconduct; in less than a month, all UK companies with more than 250 employees will have to report their gender pay gaps; across the globe women are confronting repressive laws and speaking up at home and at work. 
  We asked leading feminist thinkers if they were hopeful this International women Day  and what change they wanted to see. 
  See their answers here: 
   
    Related: Sexist agendas are finally exposed on International Women's Day  
   
  
 
 
  6.38am GMT  
  
  In Myanmar, Aung San Suu Kyi has made a speech today calling on women to build peaceful democracies. 
  Aung San Suu Kyi has come under sustained criticism  most recently losing a human rights award from the US Holocaust Museum  over her failure to act in what has been described as an ethnic cleansing of Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar. 
  Today she spoke of the need to ensure women rights. 
   
   A countrys human rights values will be enhanced when women are granted their rights. Also by using women strength and ability, it will be supportive to the development of the economy as well. 
   
  A report from the UN Population Fund at the end of 2017 found more than half of Rohingya refugees fleeing from Myanmar to Bangladesh were women and girls.  
   
   s Day at the Myanmar International Convention Centre.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"741\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Aung San Suu Kyi delivers a speech during a ceremony to mark International women Day at the Myanmar International Convention Centre. 
    Photograph: Aung Shine Oo/AP 
    
   
  
 Updated at 6.48am GMT 
 
 
  6.24am GMT  
  
  In the UK, more than 100 MPs and peers from all parties have written to the home secretary, Amber Rudd, calling for women in Northern Ireland to be allowed access to abortion services locally rather than having to come to England. 
  The letter, signed by 131 parliamentarians including eight Conservatives such as the former education secretary Justine Greening and the former chancellor Ken Clarke, the former Liberal leader David Steel and the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, follows a UN declaration that forcing women to travel for an abortion is an infringement of their human rights. 
  With the government advertising its support for women rights ahead of International women Day on Thursday, the timing of the letter is likely to be embarrassing. The Conservatives govern in alliance with the DUP, which opposes abortion. 
  Abortion is allowed in Northern Ireland only if a womens life is at risk or there is a serious or permanent risk to her mental health. Rape, incest and fatal foetal abnormalities are not seen as valid reasons for termination. 
  Last month the UN committee on the elimination of discrimination against women said thousands of women and girls in Northern Ireland faced systematic violations of rights through being compelled to either travel outside Northern Ireland to procure a legal abortion or to carry their pregnancy to term. 
   
    Related: MPs from all sides call for abortion law in N Ireland to be relaxed  
   
  
 
 
  6.14am GMT  
  
  Heres one of those stories, from Rebecca Solnit, columnist and author of Men Explain Things to Me, on the quiet revolution that paved the way for #MeToo and Times Up: 
   
    Something had shifted. Whats often overlooked is that it had shifted beforehand so that this could happen. Something invisible had made it possible for these highly visible upheavals and transformations. People often position revolution and incrementalism as opposites, but if a revolution is something that changes things suddenly, incrementalism often lays the groundwork that makes it possible. 
   Something happens suddenly, and thats mistaken for something happening out of the blue. But out of the blue usually means out of the things that most people were not paying attention to, out of the slow work done by somebody or many somebodies out of the limelight for months or years or decades. 
   
   
    Related: Feminists have slowly shifted power. Theres no going back | Rebecca Solnit  
   
  
 
 
  6.10am GMT  
  
  Todays Guardian newspaper front page is positively bristling with women and their stories: 
   
   
    Guardian front page, Thursday 8 March 2018: Russian spy and his daughter were poisoned by nerve agent pic.twitter.com/VLBX4sIDvP Guardian news (@guardiannews) 
    March 7, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  5.57am GMT  
  
  UK Labour will fine employers who do not close their gender pay gaps, the party will pledge today. 
  Under a Labour government, the party said all private and public employers who have 250 workers or more would not only have to audit their pay, but prove they are taking action to close the gap or face a fine from the government. 
  The government has already introduced a legal requirement for all major employers to publish their data on gender pay and bonuses by April 2018. Labour said it would go further and impose sanctions on businesses that had significant gaps in the pay of male and female staff. 
   
   s Day Dawn Butler MP, Shadow Equalities Minister 07-03-2018 Photograph by Martin Godwin\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Dawn Butler. 
    Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
    
   
  Shadow equalities minister Dawn Butler said the party believed companies needed to be sanctioned if they didnt act on the data: 
   
   Auditing is not enough, we need action. Some of the companies are using loopholes to get out of giving the full picture, and then theres no real enforcement if you are found to have a huge gap. 
   We dont just want people to identify the pay gap, we want the pay gap to close. 
   
   
    Related: Labour would punish firms for not closing gender pay gaps  
   
  
 
 
  5.41am GMT  
 Spanish women stage nationwide strike 
  
  Spain wakes to International women Day and a nationwide feminist strike that will see the mayors of Madrid and Barcelona, Manuela Carmena and Ada Colau, join women across the country in abandoning work  paid and unpaid  for the day. 
  The 8 March Commission, which is coordinating the action, says in its manifesto: 
   
   Today we call for a society free of sexist oppression, exploitation and violence. We call for rebellion and a struggle against the alliance of the patriarchy and capitalism that wants us to be obedient, submissive and quiet. 
   We do not accept worse working conditions, nor being paid less than men for the same work. That is why we are calling a work strike. 
   
   
    Related: Spanish women give up work for a day in first 'feminist strike'  
   
  
 Updated at 6.00am GMT 
 
 
  5.30am GMT  
  
  This morning, the all-female New Zealand Manawaora choir sang, in Te Reo Mori, a song called Nei Ra Te Karanga  I Cant Keep Quiet  at the International women Day breakfast at Wellingtons parliament house. 
   
    
   
    Nei Ra Te Karanga  I Cant Keep Quiet
    
   
  
 
 
  5.12am GMT  
  
  How has the worlds most popular search engine marked International women Day?  
  Google has dedicated its trademark doodle to showcasing the female experience today, tasking 12 female artists with creating a visual narrative of a moment, person, or event that has impacted their lives as women. 
  The result is 12 unique visual stories that reflect the diverse backgrounds of the artists, but all deal with fairly universal themes, including self-acceptance, ageing, the struggle for inclusion and love. 
  You can read more about it here. 
   
   
    \"IWD to me is an opportunity to share stories of Japanese women with people all around the  &amp; to inspire young women to change the new millennium for the better.\"- Chihiro Takeuchi, 1 of 12 artists featured in our #IWD2018 #GoogleDoodle!  pic.twitter.com/Ebv8v4oTI1 Google Doodles (@GoogleDoodles) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  As well as the doodle, Google released a rather punchy video titled Searching for Gender Equality with an accompanying data dashboard, which allows users to explore how people have been searching for topics relating to gender equality over the past year. 
  According to Google, sexual harassment has become a top issue, being searched 99% more in the last 12 months compared with to the year before.  
  You can explore the dashboard here.  
  
 
 
  4.59am GMT  
  
  Indian prime minister Narendra Modi has been tweeting a lot today about IWD and the women he says have inspired him. 
   
   
    Through their exemplary deeds, several women have left an indelible mark in the history of humankind. They continue to inspire generations. I urge you to write about some women who inspire you. #SheInspiresMe Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  The Indian governments annual economic survey, published in January, showed more than 63 million women are missing statistically across the country, with more than 21 million girls unwanted by their families. 
  The skewed ratio is largely the result of sex-selective abortions, and better nutrition and medical care for boys, according to the report. 
  The challenge of gender is long-standing, probably going back millennia, the reports author, chief economic adviser Arvind Subramanian, said at the time, adding that India must confront the societal preference for boys. 
  
 
 
  4.38am GMT  
  
  Marches and demonstrations in Asia are kicking off rallies around the world to mark International women Day, Associated Press reports. 
  Hundreds of activists in pink and purple shirts protested in the Philippines against President Rodrigo Duterte, who they said is among the worst violators of women rights in Asia. 
  Protest leaders sang and danced in a boisterous rally in downtown Manilas Plaza Miranda. They handed red and white roses to mothers, sisters and widows of several drug suspects slain under Dutertes deadly crackdown on illegal drugs. 
  A rally for the rights of female workers was scheduled for later Thursday in central Seoul in South Korea, where a rapidly spreading #Metoo movement is galvanising support for women issues. 
  Other events are planned across Asia, the Mideast, Europe and the Americas. 
  
 
 
  4.20am GMT  
  
  Progress for some women can no longer come at the cost of continued exploitation and disempowerment for others, writes Molly Harriss Olson: 
   
   Hidden Figures star Octavia Spencer recounted a conversation with her friend and The Help co-star Jessica Chastain about pay inequality, in which Spencer pointed out the colour pay gap. For every 77 cents a white women makes a white man may earn a dollar, but an African American women will earn 64 cents and a Hispanic women 56. So for an upcoming movie starring both women, Chastain tied Spencers pay to hers, increasing Spencers pay fivefold. 
   It was a money-where-her-mouth-is-moment  a profoundly tangible act, where anger and frustration triumphed in action instead of fading away into our common humiliation and impotency  
   Women who work as farmers or producers in developing countries will not benefit from black couture frocks at the Golden Globes or examinations of the pay gap in developed countries. They will not benefit from social media storms about the role of the feminist movement or definition of consent, no matter how seismic their importance. But we can still make a tangible difference; we can still have our money-where-our-mouths-are moments.  
   
   
    Related: We all have the power to bring others with us on the path to equality | Molly Harris Olson  
   
  
 
 
  4.04am GMT  
  
  Women in Nepal have been marching today to mark International women Day. According to local reports, thousands took part, calling for social, economic and political equality. 
   
   s Day in Kathmanduepa06588111 Nepalese women hold placards and balloons during a rally to mark International women Day in Kathmandu, Nepal, 08 March 2018. According to reports, thousands of women affiliated with various political parties and non-government organizations participated in the rally, calling for equal social, economic and politics rights for women. EPA/NARENDRA SHRESTHA\" width=\"1000\" height=\"654\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    International women Day in Kathmandu. 
    Photograph: Narendra Shrestha/EPA 
    
   
  
 
 
  3.57am GMT  
  
  Im keen to hear what readers around the world are doing to mark IWD. Do drop me a tweet @Claire_Phipps, comment below or use the Guardian Witness button at the top to share your stories. 
  
 
 
  3.46am GMT  
  
  The island nation of Tonga in the south Pacific is falling far behind the UN benchmark for female representation in parliament, which aims for a minimum of 30%, reports Eleanor Ainge Roy. 
  There are only two female politicians in the Tongan parliament, and Ofa Guttenbeil-Likiliki, director of Tongas Women and Children Crisis Centre, said legislative change at a state and municipal level could help address the imbalance. 
  Certainly Samoa was leading in the forefront, Guttenbeil-Likiliki told Radio New Zealand. 
  Theyve made a constitutional amendment allowing for five floating seats to be activated at any time where there are less than five women being elected through the general election process. 
  According to UN Women, Tonga has no legislation in place against domestic violence, sexual harassment, human trafficking or sex tourism; and no minimum age of sexual consent. 
  A study by the University of the South Pacific found 77% of Tongan women reported being physically or sexually abused. 
  
 
 
  3.34am GMT  
  
  In an interview with the South China Morning Post, Fiona Nott, CEO of Hong Kongs women Foundation, says women in the territory are still being left behind: 
   
    Nott reels off the figures: in the workplace, women earn on average 22% less than men, a gap that is wider than a decade ago and wider than Singapore, the US, Britain and Australia; women represent only 13.8% of Hang Seng Index company boards  just half of the 26% in the UK; and women represent just 29% of management positions  worse than Malaysia, Canada, the US and Australia. 
   The wage gap increases to 35% for elderly women. 
   Meanwhile, women make up 85% of single parents living in poverty, and 30% of women drop out of the workforce due to caring responsibilities. 
   
  You can read the full SCMP interview here. 
  
 
 
  3.20am GMT  
  
  New Zealands governor general Dame Patsy Reddy has also weighed in on the months of global change under the #MeToo movement, Eleanor Ainge Roy reports from Dunedin. 
  In the last year we have heard women voices raised in the way we havent in a long time, and their anger is palpable, she said. 
  There are still real problems in workplaces and the way power is exploited by those in positions of responsibility. 
  
 
 
  3.10am GMT  
  
  Billboards still work, said Oscar-winner Frances McDormand earlier this week, after activists took inspiration from her film Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri to highlight the deaths in Londons Grenfell tower block fire. 
  The Australian Council of Trade Unions is trying a similar tactic today in its IWD demands: for paid domestic violence leave and an end to gender-based violence in the workplace. It has directed its billboards at Kelly ODwyer, minister for women, who at a speech this week said sexual harassment and violence against women must never be tolerated. 
   
   
    This #IWD2018 we're calling for: Ten days paid domestic violence leave. The Turnbull Govt to stop dragging their feet on an @ilo convention to #StopGBVatWork.Because everyone has the right to be free from violence at work and at home. #WeWontWait pic.twitter.com/Oyxz0ubRPM Australian Unions (@unionsaustralia) 
    March 7, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  2.56am GMT  
  
  Eighty percent of those displaced by climate change are women, the BBC reports, citing figures from the UN. 
  Women and girls, the UN says, are also disproportionately affected by natural disasters  though not always for natural reasons. Horrifyingly, women and girls were more likely to die or be injured in the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami because they had not been taught how to swim or to climb trees. 
  
 
 
  2.36am GMT  
  
  Books from small and independent presses dominate a very diverse shortlist for the sixth annual $50,000 Stella Prize for Australian writing by women, announced today. 
  Miles Franklin-award winners Michelle de Kretser and Alexis Wright have both been shortlisted: de Kretser for her book of loosely linked short stories The Life to Come, and Wright for her biography of Indigenous activist Tracker Tillman.  
  Three debut novelists also feature in the shortlist: Claire G Coleman for her novel imagining a recolonised Australia, Terra Nullius; Shokoofeh Azar for her novel The Enlightenment of the Greengage Tree, written soon after the refugee authors own release from Christmas Island; and Mirandi Riwoes reworking of a short story by Somerset Maugham fused with Javanese mythology, The Fish Girl. 
  Brisbane-based author Krissy Kneen rounds out the list with An Uncertain Grace, a novel that fuses science fiction and eroticism. 
   
    Related: Stella Prize shortlist: Michelle de Kretser and Alexis Wright among nominees  
   
  
 
 
  2.17am GMT  
 Jacinda Ardern: 'There is still a need to press for progress' 
  
  Jacinda Ardern, New Zealands prime minister, says the theme for IWD  press for progress  is the right focus for this year, despite the country enjoying its highest ever rate of female representation in parliament. 
   
   We have a pay gap in New Zealand for women, that is particularly significant as well for Mori and Pasifika women. We have incredible rates of domestic violence  
   Lets remember that true equality is achieved when women are free from violence and when they have financial security. 
   
   
   
    My message for International Women's Day. pic.twitter.com/meICDXfv9A Jacinda Ardern (@jacindaardern) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  2.08am GMT  
  
  Beer company BrewDogs attempt at satirical marketing has fallen flatter than a still ale in the tense run-up to International women Day. It has been widely mocked for its attempt at addressing the gender pay gap by releasing a new Pink IPA with a pledge to sell it a fifth cheaper in its bars, because women only like pink and glitter, right? #Sarcasm. 
  Needless to say, when you have to use a hashtag to clue people in to your humour, the cause is probably lost. 
  One thing that could be celebrated though is BrewDogs principle of discounting beer  alongside the promise to donate 20% of sales to causes that fight gender inequality. With the gender pay gap existing at all tiers of the class system, its appreciated when the balance is tipped in our favour, even as a gimmick. 
  It would be nice if, maybe just for one day, 8 March 2018, feminism could trump satire, and women could get some cheap booze to celebrate. 
   
    Related: Discounted pink beer for women? BrewDog hasnt gone nearly far enough | Charlie Brinkhurst-Cuff  
   
  
 
 
  1.55am GMT  
  
  Elena del Estal has documented the lives of trafficked women in India, where hundreds of thousands of women and girls are forced into sexual and domestic slavery: 
   
   Saeeda holds her youngest daughter as she talks about how she was brought to Haryana 20 years ago with her sister. 
   I only know that I arrived in Haryana when I was 11, she says. I was brought here with my sister but I havent seen her since we arrived. 
   She was sold to Azim, a widower 20 years older who already had six children by his first wife. She says she was beaten by her husband and his family. 
   They wanted me to obey them, and if I objected they always had the same words for me: We own you because we bought you. 
   
   
    Related: 'I was bought for 50,000 rupees': India's trafficked brides  in pictures  
   
  
 
 
  1.43am GMT  
  
  In the Australian outback town of Tennant Creek, Aboriginal women and girls have marched on IWD to call for an end to alcohol-fuelled violence. 
  Tennant Creek has been in trauma in recent weeks following the alleged sexual assault of a two-year-old girl. Family and community members have accused the Northern Territory government of ignoring their long-running pleas for help combatting high rates of alcohol and drug abuse, and of family and sexual violence. 
   
   
    Tennant Creek women and girls have used IWD to call for an end to alcohol fuelled violence in the NT town @abcnewsNT @abcnews pic.twitter.com/yGHvGUGzGK Jane Bardon (@JaneBardon1) 
    March 7, 2018
    
   
  Tennant Creek saw a 23.4% increase in alcohol-related violence between December 2016 and December 2017, and a 34.3% increase in domestic assaults, according to the NT police. 
  Across Australia, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women are up to 32 times more likely to be hospitalised due to family violence than non-Indigenous women, and children are up to seven times more likely to be the subject of substantiated child abuse or neglect than non-Indigenous children. 
  Barb Shaw, the general manager of the Anyinginyi Health Aboriginal Corporation, told the Guardian the feeling of being a forgotten town was real for people in Tennant Creek, and there were major issues in the way governments cared for people in regional and remote Australia, including a lack of community policing models: 
   
   The majority of our population [in Tennant Creek] is Aboriginal and they are the most vulnerable group of people in the country. 
   Its tough for people who live out bush and in regional towns. Youve got to look out for different ways to provide service to look after families than in a centre like Darwin or Sydney  
   Weve got families in Tennant Creek where dysfunction is at the point where parents themselves are not in the position to take that first step of taking responsibility. 
   Weve got to work with parents so were helping them get to a place to take that responsibility. 
   
  
 
 
  1.32am GMT  
  
  In Spain, a strike by women means hundreds of trains have been cancelled on International women Day, AFP reports: 
   
   More than 300 trains have been cancelled on Thursday throughout Spain as workers go on strike to defend women rights on International women Day, the countrys transport ministry announced. 
   Some 200 intercity trains out of 568 wont be operating, while 105 long-distance trains are cancelled, it said. 
   The underground in Madrid will also be affected. 
   The 24-hour strike has been called by 10 unions. Feminist groups have also asked women not to spend money and to ditch their domestic chores for the day. 
   
  
 
 
  1.17am GMT  
  
  My colleague Eleanor Ainge Roy reports from Dunedin: 
  Only 18% of New Zealand businesses had women in senior management roles, a global study by Grant Thornton has found, down from 20% in 2017 and 31% in 2004. This means New Zealand has dropped from being one of the top 10 countries in the world for gender equality, to number 33 out of 35 surveyed. 
  Minister for women Julie Anne Genter said the results were surprising and not good enough, adding that one of the governments priorities was closing the gender pay gap, which remained at nearly 10% in New Zealand, and 22%-26% for Mori and Pasifika women. 
  I believe this government has already taken some concrete action, like extending paid parental leave  but there is of course always more we can do, Genter  who is expecting her first child in August, two months after prime minister Jacinda Ardern  told Radio New Zealand. 
   
   We need to focus on Mori and Pasifika women. The lowest paid women need to be prioritised because they are the ones that are suffering the most at the moment and we have a responsibility to elevate them. 
   
  Genter said raising the minimum wage would help improve women lives as 60% of NZ workers on minimum wage are women. 
  
 Updated at 2.12am GMT 
 
 
  1.08am GMT  
  
  While were on the subject of prime ministers, the British PM, Theresa May, has written for the Guardian today on violence against women: 
   
    Thousands of women endure unimaginable violence and other forms of abuse every single day, often at the hands of those to whom they are closest, in the places they should be safest. I have heard many heart-rending stories, and I am determined to stop others suffering. 
   Doing so will require a change across the whole of society in the way we think about and tackle domestic abuse  
   The governments new domestic abuse bill will lead the way in bringing about the change we need. I am launching a consultation on our proposals, and we want to hear from experts, charities, frontline professionals and as many people affected by abuse, from as many walks of life, as possible. Many suffering abuse still dont talk about what is happening to them. 
   Not all abusive behaviour is physical. Controlling, manipulative and verbally abusive behaviour ruins lives and means thousands end up isolated, living in fear. So for the first time, the bill will provide a statutory definition of domestic abuse that includes economic abuse, alongside other non-physical abuse. 
   
  Mays comments come as activists warn that women lives are put at risk by government cuts to funding for refuges. 
   
    Related: Theresa May: Our new domestic violence bill will outlaw economic and physical abuse  
   
  
 
 
  12.59am GMT  
  
  Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull doubly cares about International women Day. 
   
   
    why is he wearing two ribbons? pic.twitter.com/swouJgw7VY Alice Workman (@workmanalice) 
    March 8, 2018
    
   
  Speaking just now, Turnbull conceded that Australia does not have enough women in parliament  or in his own ministry. 
  The country has not achieved gender parity, he says, adding that a minister for women will be needed for a long time yet. 
  
 
 
  12.46am GMT  
  
  On the eve of International women Day, protesters in Seoul grouped outside the Japanese embassy to highlight the plight of so-called comfort women  a euphemism for the 200,000 girls and young women who were forced to work in Japanese brothels before and during the second world war. 
  Protesters showed 30 images of what they called Uncomfort Women  representing the 30 surviving women who still live in South Korea. 
   
   This is a campaign to let the world know that these women are here, the women who were called comfort women but were driven to the opposite of comfort themselves. 
   
   
           30     !  27 #MeToo              !  uncomfortwomen    !         #uncomfortwomen#comfortwomen #Wednesdayprotest#UN #Unwonen #metoo#warandwomen #womenday #internationalwomenday #iwd2018 A post shared by  #UNCOMFORTWOMEN (@uncomfortwomen) on Mar 6, 2018 at 11:12pm PST \"> 
   
  
 
 
  12.34am GMT  
  
  From murderers to mermaids, the whole wealth of experience features on the longlist for the 2018 women prize for fiction, according to chair of judges Sarah Sands, giving the lie to that stereotype of women fiction. 
  The 16-strong longlist for the 30,000 award for excellence, originality and accessibility in writing by women in English from throughout the world, was announced on Thursday. 
  The award, previously known as the Baileys prize, places two major names, Pulitzer winner Jennifer Egan and Booker winner Arundhati Roy, up against six debuts. The latter include Gail Honeymans Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine, which won the Costa first novel award, and Imogen Hermes Gowars The Mermaid and Mrs Hancock, a tale set in Georgian London in which a mermaid is captured. 
  Topics range from Nicola Barkers H(a)ppy, set in the far future in an apparent utopia, to Meena Kandasamys portrait of a violent marriage, When I Hit You: Or, A Portrait of the Writer as a Young Wife, and Sarah Schmidts reimagining of the Lizzie Borden murders, See What I Have Done. 
  See the full longlist here: 
   
    Related: Women's prize for fiction reveals 'outward-looking' longlist  
   
  
 
 
  12.23am GMT  
  
  We are spoiling you today with live blogs about women. If youd like to check progress of a different kind  that of USA v England in the 2018 SheBelieves Cup  take a look over here: 
   
    Related: SheBelieves Cup 2018: USA v England  live!  
   
  
 
 
  12.13am GMT  
  
  In Vanuatu, a new photo gala will celebrate female heroes. Betty Toa, the UN Women country programme coordinator for Vanuatu, said: 
   
    International women Day is an incredibly important day and we are really thrilled that Vanuatu is having a national photo exhibition  where everyone can come and see our women heroes who work hard to make Vanuatu a better place for us to live in. 
   
   
    
   
    Betty Toa, the UN Women country programme coordinator for Vanuatu.
    
   
  
 
 
  12.00am GMT  
  
  More from New Zealand, courtesy of Eleanor Ainge Roy: 
  Former New Zealand prime minister Helen Clark  a friend and mentor to current PM Jacinda Ardern  has said being a 37-year-old unmarried leader would have been unthinkable at the time she entered politics and no one would even have considered having a female PM. (There have now been three in New Zealand.) 
  Clark told the Breakfast show: 
   
   In 1981, about a month before the election, Peter [Davis] and I did get married because people said this is a liability, you are a de-facto couple. 
   You did feel that pressure, and you didnt want to do anything to damage the partys prospects, or your own prospects, in retaining what was a very safe and loyal Labour constituency. 
   So, social attitudes have moved light years since then, and I think thats a very, very good thing. 
   
  
 
 
  11.51pm GMT  
  
  As I mentioned earlier, despite the conversational shifts weve seen in 2018, in plenty of ways it feels as if little has changed: 
   
   An Iranian women who publicly removed her veil in protest against Irans compulsory headscarf law has been sentenced to two years in prison, the judiciary said on Wednesday. 
   Tehrans chief prosecutor, Abbas Jafari Dolatabadi, who announced the sentence, did not give the womens identity but said she intended to appeal against the verdict, the judiciarys Mizan Online news agency reported. 
   Dolatabadi said the unidentified women took off her headscarf in Tehrans Enghelab Street to encourage corruption through the removal of the hijab in public. 
   More than 30 Iranian women have been arrested since the end of December for publicly removing their veils in defiance of the law. 
   
   
    Related: Iranian women who removed headscarf jailed for two years  
   
  
 
 
  11.41pm GMT  
  
  For International women Day the Guardian posed three questions to activists and writers who appeared at the Sydney Opera Houses All About Women festival: 
   
   Whats the most pressing issue for women in 2018?  
   #MeToo has been a huge moment, but whats the next step?  
   If you could have dinner with any women, living or dead, real or fictional, past or present, who would it be and why? 
   
  Read their answers in our gallery here: 
   
    Related: Ten influential women answer questions about women  in pictures  
   
  
 
 
  11.33pm GMT  
  
  The 27th prime minister of Australia, Julia Gillard, has given a speech at an IWD event hosted by the Royal women Hospital in Melbourne. Gillard made international headlines in October 2012 when she called out alleged sexism by the then opposition leader Tony Abbott in parliament. 
  Today, Gillard, who is now chair of mental health organisation beyondblue, spoke to a group of women about mental health, the gender pay gap, and women in leadership. She said more work needed to be done on unconscious bias against women, and those researching this bias needed to be working with people in sectors where women were most poorly represented and treated. 
   
   Because the reality is, in Australia and across the globe, women are not being given the opportunity to serve in equal measure to their male colleagues. This is true of the public sector and the private sector. It is true of universities, hospitals, boardrooms, courthouses and small businesses  
   Currently, women make up just 23% of national parliamentarians, 26% of news media leaders, 27% of judges, 15% of corporate board members and 24% of senior managers worldwide. 
   Just over a week ago, in Washington, our prime minister Malcolm Turnbull attended a dinner with president Trump and leaders in the business community. Of the 51 attendees, there were more men named Andrew (five) than the total number of women (four) who attended the event. 
   
  Gillard said the way things were going, it would take another half-century for the number of women in national parliaments to reach parity with men: 
   
   And, even worse, when progress is made, it can also be reversed. Women are more under-represented in the American cabinet than at any time since the Reagan administration. 
   Even in Nordic countries, often held up as beacons of progress, there has been a 6.2% drop in the number of female ministers since 2015 to 43.5%. 
   Its not just in the political world that progress has stalled. The number of women in senior management globally has risen just one percentage point in 10 years, from 24% in 2007 to 25% today. 
   
   
   
    Thanks for joining us this morning @JuliaGillard @Sally_Capp for #IWD2018 what a great start to the day! pic.twitter.com/AYRB9Ng0bS The Women's (@thewomen) 
    March 7, 2018
    
   
  Gillard told attendees that women faced significant barriers to progress at every stage of their careers: 
   
   In fact, still today, in at least 18 countries husbands can legally prevent their wives from working  How can we expect to get women into leadership positions if we cant even get them into the workforce? 
   More often though, the barriers are less obvious  informal rules and norms of institutions that seek to exclude women. 
   
  Gillard cited research that found people were likely to correlate leadership and likability for men while doing the reverse for women. 
   
   As a result, when a women breaks through and is seen as a decisive leader, she is likely to be stereotyped an unlikeable  
   In the US , there is an online tool called Rate My Professor, which students use to critique their lecturers. A huge interactive exploration of 14 million reviews on the site discovered that male professors are disproportionately likely to be described as a star or genius. Female professors are disproportionately described as nasty, ugly, bossy or disorganised. 
   
  Gillard also referred to the results of an experiment conducted at a university in North Carolina, where researchers asked students to rate teachers of an online course. The students never met the teacher in person: 
   
   This enabled the researchers to present the same teacher to some students as a man and to other students as a women. 
   Disturbingly, when students were taking the class from someone they believed to be male, they rated the teacher more highly. The very same teacher, when believed to be female, was rated significantly lower. 
   Given this research, the fact that gender influences perceptions seems undeniable. 
   
  
 
 
  11.21pm GMT  
  
  Im keen to hear what readers around the world are doing to mark IWD. Do drop me a tweet @Claire_Phipps, comment below or use the Guardian Witness button at the top to share your stories. 
   
   
    This is what I and many others part of @pen_int across the world have been doing for International Women's Day and beyondMargie Orford (@MargieOrford) 
    March 7, 2018
    
   
  You can read the PEN international women manifesto here: The vitality and beauty of literature is diminished if women stories are not told and when women voices are not heard. 
  
 
 
  11.12pm GMT  
  
  My colleague Eleanor Ainge Roy reports from Dunedin: 
  Vanisa Dhiru, president of the National Council of Women New Zealand, said the World Economic Forums 2017 global gender gap report suggested that gender equality could still be over 200 years away. 
  This is absolutely unacceptable and its worse for some groups of women than others, because of racism, transphobia and other forms of oppression, said Dhiru, who said it was time for New Zealand to embrace the #MeToo and Times Up global movements. 
  Recent exposure of sexual harassment of interns in one of the countrys top legal firms was a sign of progress, she added. 
  Kristine Bartlett being named the 2018 New Zealander of the Year, for her work on the pay equity campaign for low-paid care workers, is hugely inspirational and it gives me hope that it might not take the 200 years to reach gender equality that has been predicted. 
  
 
 
  11.07pm GMT  
  
  According to Australias Human Rights Commission, women make up 50.2% of Australias population. That means that women get 50.2% of everything, right? 
  So many women find themselves suspecting  merely on the basis of instinct, observation or just plain lived experience  that even in pretty Australia something seems desperately out of whack in regards to the statistical social, political and economic experience of women to men. So my IWD gift to you, my femme cadre, is something rare and precious youll never receive in an argument with a beer-garden misogynist; hard data that proves gender disadvantage is not only intersectional, but true! 
   
    Related: Quiz! Do women suck? Or is it the world? | Van Badham  
   
  
 
 
  10.59pm GMT  
  
  An artist in residence at Londons Tate gallery has resigned, saying arts institutions are failing women. 
  Liv Wynter timed her resignation for the eve of International women Day to highlight what she called the invisible inequalities of the art world. 
  Wynter said she was also angered by recent comments from Maria Balshaw, the Tate director, who told the Times she had not personally experienced sexual harassment: Then, I wouldnt. I was raised to be a confident women who, when I encountered harassment, would say: Please dont  or something rather more direct. 
  Balshaw has since apologised for her comments, saying she had not meant to blame women for their harassment. 
  But Wynter, in a letter to Balshaw, said the words had been a huge slap in the face to her: 
   
   I cannot describe to you the personal shame I feel as a survivor of domestic violence, to work for someone who could think so little of me whilst simultaneously profiting off my survivorness and the work I dare to make about it. 
   
  Read the full story here: 
   
    Related: Tate artist in residence quits, claiming gallery is failing women  
   
  
 
 
  10.44pm GMT  
  
  Welcome  wherever you are in the world, but particularly to those whove already tipped into 8 March  to our live coverage of International women Day 2018. 
  The mood this year feels different. Real change is underway: women in Saudi Arabia can now drive, or go to sports matches. Milestones have been reached: its 100 years since (partial) women suffrage in the UK. There are loud conversations around harassment, pay inequality and more. Times Up and #MeToo have edged beyond hashtags into palpable anger and hunger for action.  
  In other ways, though, it feels as if little has changed. A man who bragged about grabbing women by the pussy sits in the Oval Office. A prime minister is asked in a TV interview when she conceived her unborn child. Women still routinely face sexual harassment at work. Reported cases of female genital mutilation continue to rise. 
  Well be tracking the day here on our live blog as it rolls across the globe. Do get in touch to share whats going on where you are: via the comments below, to Guardian Witness here or via the button at the top of the blog, or directly to me on Twitter @Claire_Phipps. 
  
"
"90""To get to House of Rainbow you turn off the Apata Road from Ibadan at the Moco petrol station and you make your way down a rutted track through a cluttered market. Ibadan is Yoruba heartland, the regions commercial hub and the home of what was once Africas most illustrious university. Here, on Ibadans western fringes, shanty-commerce rubs against gated residential compounds, and at the end of the track you enter one of these: three buildings, in various stages of distress, around a car park. You knock on the door through the locked gate on the corner unit of one of the buildings; once you are appraised through the keyhole the gate will be unlocked and you will enter a living room with white plastic chairs set in makeshift pews around an altar, beneath a rainbow banner with the word PEACE painted on to it.  Pastor Jude Onwambor  a furniture-salesman by day  will remind you that while you are to comport yourselves decently on arrival, you are now free to take your feminine attire out of your bags and become your true selves, the daughters or darlings (dar-liiiiiiiiiiiings!) you really are.    Related: Post-colonial talk back: seeing London in the South Seas    Pastor Jude, in his 30s, is genial and taciturn; his deputy, Ayo, a decade younger, is a motor-mouthed rap poet, wiry and explosive: Peace! Do not be afraid! You are not going to die! he exclaimed during his sermon the day I visited, in October 2014. He was citing Judges 6 23. As we listen to these words today, we feel the peace that has been lacking in our minds, he said in his sermon. It was a few months after Nigerias Same-Sex Marriage (Prohibition) Act had been signed into law by its president, Goodluck Jonathan. This is the worlds harshest anti-gay law outside of Islamic sharia: there are mandatory sentences of 14 years for any kind of homosexual behaviour and you can be prosecuted for not turning in a gay neighbour, friend or family member. If ever anyone is telling you youre not perfect, tell them that God made you, Ayo continued, and God does not make mistakes. He says, Ive selected you to be a prophet, to be different, to be unique. Tell your neighbour, Im unique! Im unique! the congregants  young men and TVs, as transgender women called themselves  murmured to one another, a quiet ripple of self-affirmation across the room.  We are not the only ones passing through this, Ayo concluded his sermon, the day I visited. In Uganda theyre facing the same thing. In Russia theyre facing the same thing. So I encourage us to be calm, to be focused on our education, our work, our health status, to value whatever were doing very well. God will grant us our peace.  House of Rainbow has been around since 2005, when a legendary activist named Jide Macaulay started the first chapter in Lagos, Nigerias mega-city 130km to the south of Ibadan. Two years later he was forced to leave Nigeria after he came out in the local media, and he is now an ordained Anglican deacon in Britain. With funding he had raised, Reverend Jide  as he was universally known  rented this flat, one of several underground House of Rainbow local groups in Nigerian cities.     The more rights are gained by minorities in parts of the world, the stronger the backlash is against them in others    The men I met that day had horror stories, from even before the new law had been passed. Charles, a young physiotherapy aide in tight lemon slacks and a frilly vest now that he was inside, used male pronouns but understood himself to be a TV, and dreamed of gender transition somewhere, somehow. He was discovered having sex with a friend, he told me, and subjected to a 40-day deliverance process in the family church that involved being beaten repeatedly with a broom. If you try to kill the gay in me, you will have to kill me, he had eventually said to his mother.  Charles friend Desmond, lithe and handsome, affected an area-boy (street-thug) style and boasted of his conquests. He had been arrested twice: frame-ups that were resolved through the paying of a bribe. A few months after I met him Desmond would be arrested for a third time, one of 21 young men attending a birthday party. Following a complaint by a neighbor there was a police raid: they found 122 condoms in a bag belonging to an HIV peer-educator, and on the basis of this and the fact that there were no women present, they arrested the men on suspicion of being part of a gay cult. Faced with the prospect of 14 years imprisonment, the men or their families found the funds needed to bribe their captors, between 10,000 and 25,000 naira each (between US$60 and US$150). Although there were almost no prosecutions under the new law, enacting it had  Jide Macaulay told me  broken into the very homes of LGBTI people, because of the way it permits family to snitch on each other and makes things impossible in health, in the workplace, in housing. Anyone has an excuse to deny you housing, or treatment, or a roof over your head. In Nigeria you have to put down a years deposit on a place: the landlord finds out youre gay, he chucks you out and keeps the money. What are you going to do? A 2016 Human Rights Watch report found that the laws impact was far-reaching and severe: it had become a tool used by some police officers and members of the public to legitimise multiple human rights violations perpetrated against LGBTI people, including torture, sexual violence, arbitrary detention, violations of due process rights, and extortion. HRW was particularly concerned about rising incidents of mob violence against suspected homosexuals.  * * * A few weeks after Goodluck Jonathan signed the Same-Sex Marriage (Prohibition) Act into law in early 2014, the United Kingdom (excepting Northern Ireland) became the 14th country in the world to permit same-sex couples to wed, and the third in the Commonwealth after Canada and South Africa. Queen Elizabeth had given her royal assent to this. And yet in 36 of the 52 states of the Commonwealth, the association of former British colonies which the Queen headed, homosexuality remained illegal. And in early 2018 the British overseas territory of Bermuda actually re-criminalised same-sex unions a year after its supreme court had legalised them.   Related: The unequal battle: privilege, genes, gender and power | @Anna_Kessel    In the 21st century, there are two parts of the world where the law still generally criminalises male homosexual sex: Muslim countries and former colonies of the British empire. And in some of these latter countries, including Nigeria and Uganda, the original penal code proscriptions inherited from Britain have being strengthened by harsh new legislation. In colonial times, Cecil John Rhodes vowed to paint a line in pink  the colour of British dominion, on the maps  from the Cape to Cairo; now, a century later, a new pink line seems to be being drawn across the globe, a new human rights frontier around sexuality and gender identity that divides and describes the world in an entirely new way. In the past few years a troubling new global equation seems to have come into play: the more rights are gained by sexual and gender minorities in some parts of the world, the stronger the backlash is against them in others. The irony is that it was the British empire that criminalised homosexuality in the first place. The original colonial penal code proscribing carnal intercourse against the order of nature was written by Thomas Macaulay for India, passed into law in 1860. Sir Samuel Griffiths Queensland penal code, passed in 1899, criminalised both the active and the passive participants in such acts and widened the definition of them beyond penetration. Between them, these two codes provided the template for most of Britains colonies, with the Queensland law particularly influential in African colonies. In Africa and Asia, the British were preoccupied with what the legal scholar Alok Gupta has termed fears of moral infection from the natives, and with the mission of moral reform among these new subjects. In Australia, same-sex relationships among convicts were considered the most serious threat to lawful authority the marriage-equality activist Rodney Croome said in the Guardian in October 2017. This legacy of convictism, Croome believes, is the best way to understand Australias resistance to LGBTI equality well into the 21st century. Homosexual acts were only fully decriminalised in South Australia in 1975, and Queensland itself only followed suit 15 years later, in 1990. Tasmania was forced to repeal its sodomy law in 1997, after a landmark case taken to the United Nations human rights committee.     People who identify themselves as members of the LGBT community parade in Entebbe, Uganda, in 2015. Photograph: Reuters    Because the shedding of empire preceded Britains decriminalisation of homosexuality in 1967, newly independent countries in Africa, Asia and the Caribbean maintained the laws that criminalised homosexuality, although they were seldom enforced before LGBTI rights began to be asserted in the 21st century. The irony, of course, was that many of these countries were using colonial legislation to back up their claims that homosexuality was unacceptable, and that the demand for its decriminalisation was a neocolonial slight on their sovereignty. The British prime minister David Cameron did not help things when he said, at the Perth Commonwealth heads of government meeting in October 2011, that British aid to countries should now be conditional on their decriminalisation of homosexuality.  African governments and commentators responded with fury. A Ugandan presidential spokesman described Camerons remarks as patronising, colonial rhetoric and the Tanzanian foreign minister fumed: We have our own moral values. Homosexuality is not part of our culture and we will never legalise it  We are not ready to allow any rich nation to give us aid based on unacceptable conditions simply because we are poor. African LGBTI activists reported a significant uptick in public homophobia in their home countries as a consequence of the backlash against Camerons statement. For this reason, activists are treading gingerly at the moment, in the run-up to the Commonwealth heads of government meeting in London next month. Every effort is being made to get other leaders to raise the issue rather than just Theresa May and Justin Trudeau, Paul Dillane, the executive director of the British Kaleidoscope Trust told me, to break the cycle of this being seen as a northern preoccupation.   Related: Why the dream of Empire 2.0 is still 'cobblers'    Kaleidocope convenes the Commonwealth Equality Network, comprised of LGBTI organisations from 41 countries, that lobbies within the body for legal reform. The network is pinning its hopes on Maltas Joseph Muscat: the country had become a global leader on the issue (it was the first European country to protect LGBTI rights explicitly in its constitution), and at the 2015 Chogm he hosted, Muscat used the platform to argue strongly for decriminalisation. The new Commonwealth secretary general, Baroness (Patricia) Scotland  a British women of West Indian descent  has also vowed to take the issue up: in a 2017 interview she said: We are working alongside countries, making an economic case for inclusion [of LGBTI people and rights]. The economic argument, Dillane believes, has proven to be the winning one thus far, in Mozambique, Seychelles and Nauru, the Commonwealth countries that have voluntarily decriminalised homosexuality in the past three years: the costs of policing and jailing otherwise law-abiding citizens versus the benefits of tourism, reputation, the ability to attract foreign talent and to develop local human resources fully. A fourth Commonwealth country, Belize, has been compelled to decriminalise homosexuality after a successful supreme court appeal, and, in late 2017, a similar appeal was being prepared in Trinidad and Tobago. There were also ongoing legal appeals and policy reforms in several African Commonwealth countries, most notably Kenya, Malawi, Namibia and Botswana  not around decriminalisation per se, but rather the rights to equality and protection from discrimination. In Nigeria, there are no such prospects for reform. * * * Shortly after I visited Ibadan, the House of Rainbow operation there shut down because it had become, Jude Onwambor told me, a security risk. It would be much safer working under the cover of public health. And so he had set up a new organisation that did Aids-awareness work. In 2017 he opened a drop-in centre that functioned as a community gathering place in the centre of town. As with the church, the comportment rules prevailed: arrive properly but be yourselves when inside.  Still, the Aids epidemic only heightened many African countries dependence on the west, and in this context a new impetus to fight the neocolonialism of development aid emerged. As Africans became increasingly uncomfortable with their countries dependence on the west, some looked to a different way to assert their pride: despite their poverty, at least they had values.  The battle against gay rights became the surest way of rubbing salt in the colonial wound, of drawing a pink line between the proud Africans  Christian and Muslim  who wished to save their traditional values and protect their cultural sovereignty against rapacious neocolonialists who not only had lost their moral compass in the rapidly secularising west, but whose call for rights threatened the status quo. The African homophobia of the 21st century is thus a toxic mixture of religion and politics, fuelled by the Aids epidemic and the stigmas associated with it.     Now theres a new generation that says, We exist!  They are the fearless generation. There will be consequences  Jide Macaulay     Nowhere is this more visible than in Nigeria. On 30 July 2017, 42 men were arrested at the Vintage hotel in northern Lagos. They were attending a monthly party; a fight had broken out and the police had been called and detained everyone present, having caught them in the act, as a news report put it. In the act, of course, of being gathered together as suspected homosexuals: under the terms of the new legislation no other other evidence was necessary. After their bails had been posted (and their names and faces splashed all over the media), the national Sun newspaper led with the headline: HIV epidemic looms. The author, Chioma Igbokwe, reported that 99% of the men had tested HIV-positive in jail, and now roam freely in the society as a result of the watering down of the bail condition  for an offence that is one of the gravest in the countrys criminal code. Igbokwe opined that it was not far-fetched that they could be infecting new persons by the day given the propensity among some of them to suddenly go on an infection-spree mission.  Ranged against this hate speech, though, is an extraordinary new generation of outspoken queer Nigerian voices: people like Richard Akuson, whose online magazine A Nasty Boy is dedicated to otherness in fashion, people and culture, or Chibuihe Obi, who was abducted and tortured for several weeks after publishing an essay called Were Queer, Were Here in Brittle Paper, an online journal that has become the hub of this new queer literary scene.  Jide Macaulay, House of Rainbows founder, tells me he is both thrilled and terrified by the advent of such outspoken voices. Of the 10 African countries in which he works, his native land is by far the most challenging, he says. But now theres a new generation that says, We exist! Of people being pushed too far and now fed up: This is who I am! Kill me if you want. It is a powder keg: They are the fearless generation. There will be consequences. Is it coincidence that this efflorescence is occurring in the very years of the Same-Sex Marriage (Prohibition) Act? I certainly do not think of those laws every time I sit down to write, Brittle Papers submissions editor, Otosirieze Obi-Young, tells me. Still, he believes the ferocity of his generations writing is a product of two things: the state-licensed homophobia they have encountered, and the ability they have to express themselves  and connect  on the newly available broadbands of social media.  Thus do they live on the pink line, these young Nigerians, toggling between their new virtual freedom and the dangers of life offline. For the first time they are present, and visible. As Chibuihe Obi puts it, Fnally, we are here.  This is an edited extract from the Griffith Review 59: Commonwealth Now "
"91""I have a friend  lets call him Dave, though thats not his name  who is active in his church, a loving and supportive husband, and a hilarious dinner companion. Hes also a former rapist. He confessed this to me in fits and starts, over dinners and phone calls and late-night drinks, after wed known each other a couple of years.  His story matches much of the research my work relies on, but it still forced me to re-evaluate some of my core assumptions about rapists and about the role of men in ending rape. Daves former MO is familiar to anyone who thinks about sexual violence for a living. He picked victims he knew. He got them alone, encouraged them to have conversations that made them feel vulnerable, and pressed a lot of alcohol on them. And then, when they were too drunk to consent, he had sex with them. (Thats how he thought about it at the time, though today he will tell you straight up it was rape.) The research is very clear: most rapists know they dont have consent, and they rape an average of six times each. Before Dave told me his story, I thought that meant that most rapists were essentially sociopaths. I worried for a long time that Dave, too, must be a sociopath. But Ive done a lot of thinking and searching on that idea, and I just dont think he is. I think hes a guy who grew up with some very toxic ideas about what it means to be a man. While Daves violence is inexcusable, his story also gives me some hope. It shows that men can change. Even men whove already done terrible things.   Embed   Better models of masculinity are everywhere, if you know where to look. When I polled my friends about where they find examples of the kind of masculinities they want to see more of in the world, the crowdsourced list was dazzling in its diversity and included the musician Frank Ocean (for his openness and vulnerability around sexuality); the basketball star Steph Curry caring for his daughter at post-game press conferences; all of Barack Obamas interactions with children; queer men of various stripes subverting the very definitions of manhood; and an array of fictional men of film and TV, including Bob from Bobs Burgers and modern superheroes like the Flash and Midnighter. American men may be enjoying more emotional vulnerability in their superhero stories, but they also elected the living embodiment of toxic masculinity as president. Trump has spent his life defining his manliness in opposition to the women he dominates and degrades. He has been accused of sexual assault by over a dozen women, including his first wife, Ivana. The men hes installed into power share his attitudes. And when these men talk about making America great again, one of the things theyre yearning for is the re-establishment of traditional gender values in which men are dominant, women are subservient, and anyone who questions whether thats really the natural order of things is punished. My friend Dave grew up in a household steeped in those very values. It was only in learning that there are other, better ways to be a man that he became the friend I know him as today. Thats not to say that we should let guys whove already offended of the hook in order to tempt them into the light. If you hurt someone, whether or not you mean to, you should face consequences. In fact, consequences can sometimes help facilitate learning.   Related: Men after #MeToo: Theres a narrative that masculinity is fundamentally toxic'    I think one of the reasons my behavior went unchecked for so long is that I didnt suffer any consequences, recalls Dave. It wasnt until he lost a friendship he valued that he had to think about his behavior in a new light. Whatever he knows now, he still hurt those women, and if any of them decided to hold him accountable for that, Id support them. So would Dave, for that matter.  He has hardly become a full-time feminist crusader, but he does small things that make a big difference. He refuses to laugh at rape jokes or slut-shaming or anything that reduces women to commodities, and he goes out of his way to explain to other men why these things arent funny.  He doesnt vote for candidates who want to control women access to abortion or birth control.  Hes raising his daughter to know that her body is her own.  These are, of course, small victories, less revolution and more baby steps toward basic human decency.   Embed   The difficulties in divorcing masculinity from misogyny arent confined to the tricky business of rape prevention. Hostile sexism  the kind that involves calling women degrading names, rape and rape threats  is the kind thats most often linked to toxic masculinity. But its not the only kind of masculinity that relies on the dehumanization of women. After all, if men were just hostile to women all of the time, why would any of us enter into relationships with them?  Instead, hostile sexism plays Mr Hyde to benevolent sexisms Dr Jekyll, the two of them teaming up to keep women subservient to mens needs. Benevolent sexism says that real men protect good women, who are morally superior angels living on uncomfortably narrow pedestals. Its a kinder, gentler way to force three-dimensional women into two-dimensional boxes and strip us of our humanity.     Dozens of programs work with boys to help them rethink what it means to be a man. These programs need to start younger    We have to get a lot more deliberate if we want to transform masculinity into a healthy identity that doesnt rely on the subjugation of women. It would be a whole lot easier if we started at the beginning, teaching boys that being strong includes being able to embrace their own vulnerable emotions and that girls arent teacups or trophies or aliens from Venus but fellow human beings who are pretty dang interesting. Karen BK Chan, a sex and emotional literacy educator, speaks compellingly of the need to teach boys resiliency in the face of sexual rejection. How might we empathize with a young guy who is balancing masculinity pressures and the desire to show and receive love? she encourages us to ask. How can we help him experience bearable rejection instead of unbearable failure? Across the country, dozens of programs work with high school and college-age boys to help them rethink what it means to be a man. These programs need to start younger. We need to shift from an intervention mindset  trying to shift young mens conceptions of masculinity after theyve already been formed  to a prevention mindset in which we help boys develop healthier ideas about gender to start with. Research suggests middle school could be an ideal time to inoculate boys against toxic masculinity. Middle school boys ability to resist traditional masculine norms is relatively strong, but weakens when they get to high school.    Embed   Maine Boys to Men (MBTM), a program that has long worked with high school boys, is developing a curriculum for middle school boys that teaches them to see and sidestep the rigid gender roles theyre already growing into. Thats only part of its shift from being strictly a training program for high school students to becoming a multifaceted program working to transform masculinity at the community level. In some ways, this shift is the result of the executive director Matthew Theodores very productive midlife crisis. Until 2012, he was general manager for marketing and strategy at a division of Microsoft. Unfulfilled, he started looking for not-for-profit organizations to connect with and stumbled into a board position at Boys to Men.  Since he had three boys of his own, then ages six, eight, and eleven, its no surprise the work quickly got under his skin, or that he saw the potential impact of working with younger boys. MBTM adapted its high school curriculum for a middle school audience and tested it during the 2015-2016 academic year, reaching just over 500 boys in southern Maine. It tuned it up accordingly, adding more periods of physical activity and centering emotional literacy as the heart of the program, and wound up with a four-hour curriculum. The program is usually delivered one hour at a time over the course of four weeks at participating schools. The course begins with the gender box exercise thats a hallmark of all MBTM programs. The idea is simple: the group leader draws a big box on the chalkboard, and the boys brainstorm stereotypes of masculinity. All of those go inside the box. Then they discuss what happens if a guy tries to behave in a way thats not described in the box. Those punishments and threats hover around the outside of the box. The completed visual serves as a jumping off point to discuss how confining traditional masculinity can be and how harmful to both boys and girls, both men and women. Once they are primed to move beyond the gender box, the course gets the boys up and moving through a series of exercises in which they have to decide what they think about topics related to sexism and violence and debate their opinions with peers. Empathy is the glue that holds together all of the ideas in the course. As an adult women, my presence would have inhibited the boys in the middle school program. But MBTM let me check out day two of a two-day program for high school students. The high school programs differ from their middle school work in more than age grouping  the high school group is mixed gender, with a hand-selected bunch of students the school has identified as being leaders or showing leadership potential across a range of social circles, teams, and interests. The idea is to use these teens as a schoolwide vaccine, each inoculating those in their particular spheres of influence. In one exercise, students were asked to respond physically to a series of scenarios by walking toward one side of the room or the other to indicate where on the spectrum of healthy to abusive the relationship being described sounded to them. The most contentious scenario involved a girl, Lindsay, and her prom date Ben. The two have left an after party when Ben turns off on to a strange side street and stops the car. Lindsay pretends to sleep. He kisses her neck, gropes her breast. She pushes his hand away; he gropes her some more. The three students who take a stand in Bens defense are all girls: She didnt say no.  One boy says: Its not on her to say something. She has indicated that she does not want this to continue. A facilitator ends the stalemate, announcing that what Ben did is sexual assault, in no uncertain terms. The girls remain unconvinced. Its a stark reminder that toxic masculinities arent just perpetuated by men. After completing the program, the students will be assigned an adviser and encouraged to help their fellow students step out of their gender boxes.   Related: Men still die before women. Is toxic masculinity to blame? | Haider Javed Warraich and Robert Califf    Its all part of a focus on making a community project of shifting gender norms that everyone can take part in. To that end, MBTM is also expanding its adult offerings, including a boot camp for new dads that offers practical parenting prep along with some exercises to help the dads think about how they want gender to play out in their relationship with their co-parent, their parenting style, and the values they pass on to their kids.   Embed   Though the high school program has proved effective through years of evaluation, its too soon to say what impact the new offerings will have. But the signs are encouraging. Feedback from the middle school boys is almost universally positive, with most of them saying theyre going to change the way they talk to people or adjust their judgments about how others do gender. Kids have come up after were done, facilitator Sam Eley tells me, and said, Man, Im really not going to try and be in a box! The staff at MBTM hopes that the project will transform the kind of measurement they can do on the effectiveness of their interventions, by following the students as they grow into high schoolers and beyond. That kind of longitudinal data on transforming masculinities is nearly nonexistent and could light a way forward for many other programs to follow. And not a moment too soon, because the boys are already being influenced by our fragile masculinist-in-chief. Adapted from Unscrewed: Women, Sex, Power, and How to Stop Letting the System Screw Us All, by Jaclyn Friedman. Copyright  2017. Available from Seal Press, an imprint of Perseus Books, LLC, a subsidiary of Hachette Book Group, Inc."
"92""Here is a question that has probably never crossed your mind: how woke is aviation? Never, that is, until now. A political-correctness row has reportedly errupted at the Australian airline Qantas, whose staff have been advised of language that is more respectful of the LGBTI community and others, as part of a Spirit of Inclusion month. According to reports, an information booklet instructed male employees to avoid manterrupting  cutting off female colleagues  and told all staff to say partner rather than husband or wife, because language can make groups of people invisible. For example, the use of the term chairman can reinforce the idea that leaders are always men. The booklet also warned against unconscious colonialist bias when discussing Australian history. The former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott weighed in to the row, calling Qantas the corporate thought police. But, says Qantas spokesman Andrew McGinnes, there was no such booklet: We shared some language suggestions developed by the Diversity Council of Australia on our corporate intranet to help start a conversation about the impact language can have on an inclusive workplace. But why is this even on Qantass radar? Why has an airline started talking like an ultra-hip post-colonial gender studies graduate? Lets take a look at the industrys previous and see what we conclude. Last month, the travel group Tui (formerly Thomson Airways) reported the largest gender pay gap of any major UK company, with female staff paid less than half the salary of their male colleagues. The company said this was largely because few women hold highly paid roles such as pilot or engineer. So thats comforting. And, across the industry, female cabin crew are still routinely directed to wear, along with make-up, restrictive pencil skirts and heels that leave some with bunions and back-ache. However, female crew at British Airways have successfully challenged their dress-code and can now wear trousers. And, last month, easyJets new chief executive, Johan Lundgren, took a voluntary 34,000 pay cut to match the salary of his female predecessor, Carolyn McCall. But its hard to escape the feeling that this is just tinkering around the edges when the emperors of aviation have such a long way to go."
"93""A historic community hall in south London is facing partial demolition to make way for a new evangelical church that believes homosexual sex is wrong and gay marriage unbiblical. LGBT rights campaigners and members of the community in Merton, Wimbledon, are furious about the deal between the council and Elim Pentecostal church. The council will fund a church and community hall for Elim in exchange for its existing site which the council needs for a new academy school. The value of the new facilities has been estimated at up to 4m. The Equalities and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) has become embroiled in the deal amid concerns the church may deny LGBT groups access to the facilities.  Elim subscribes to the position of the Evangelical Alliance on homosexuality which says that homoerotic sexual practice is incompatible with His will as revealed in scripture. It believes sexually active same-sex partnerships are not a legitimate form of Christian relationship. Habitual homoerotic sexual activity without repentance warrants consideration for church discipline, it states. When council officers asked the churchs administrator, Sarah Bale, about who it would rent the facilities to, she replied it would consider bookings on a case by case basis and it would take bookings that did not conflict with the constitution of our charity. The EHRC has written to the council seeking clarification of the basis on which the remodelled premises will be available following disposal, specifically whether Elim will seek to rely on exceptions ... in the Equality Act in deciding whether to hire the premises to particular groups or individuals. Elim is a movement of more than 550 Christian congregations in the UK and Ireland, founded by George Jeffreys. It turned over 65m in the year to October 2016, has reserves worth 134m and employs nearly 2,000 people. Several London borough of Merton councillors have raised concerns the council is breaching its own equalities protocol by using taxpayers money to promote and enhance a church whose attitudes and beliefs are understandably seen as homophobic by some. In a formal submission, three councillors said: It is feared that LGBT+ residents and community groups risk being prevented from accessing these facilities. Local residents have secured a designation for the building as an asset of community value, which could allow the community to bid for the property which has been used for martial arts classes, dance workshops, rugby for toddlers, and a worship space. The council has already signed a swap deal, so it is unclear if the communitys right to bid will apply. Elim did not respond to direct questions about whether it would rent out Merton hall to LGBT+ groups. Bale said: We encourage all our churches to be welcoming and loving to all people regardless of age, gender, or sexual and religious orientation as we seek to follow the example and teaching of Christ, and we aim to reflect this in our congregation in Wimbledon.  We seek to affirm Gods love for all human beings, in accordance with the Bible, and we wholeheartedly seek to encourage and inspire positive communities of grace, encouragement and mutual support. Merton council declined to say whether it was satisfied that gay groups would be able to book the new facilities. A spokesperson said: Merton hall is the last piece in the jigsaw to build a much needed school. We are grateful to community groups like Elim, which is a very ethically diverse and welcoming church that does a lot of fantastic community work, including running our boroughs food bank, for agreeing to make way for our school in return for being kitted out in newly refurbished and extended premises. We were therefore happy to swap their premises and site for this locally listed building, which is the most appropriate and cost-effective location in Wimbledon."
"94""Top story: You dont make this in your kitchen Hello, its Warren Murray with the pocket edition of the days news.  The exiled Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia were poisoned by deliberate exposure to a nerve agent, say counter-terror police, who are treating the case as attempted murder. The Salisbury police officer first to the scene of their collapse has also fallen seriously ill, it has been revealed. The poison used has been identified, according to police, who declined to name it. The best known nerve agents are VX and sarin, both of which are difficult and dangerous to produce outside a well-equipped laboratory  raising suspicions of an assassination attempt involving the Russian state. This needs expertise and a special place to make it or you will kill yourself, said one expert. An unidentified man and a women were captured on CCTV strolling in the alleyway close to the bench where Skripal was poisoned. The women had blond hair and was holding a large scarlet bag. A little over a year ago, VX was used in Kuala Lumpur airport to murder Kim Jong-nam, the younger brother of North Koreas dictator, Kim Jong-un. * * * Women on the march  Its international women day and we are covering protests, celebrations and other events live.   s day vigil in Dhaka, Bangladesh.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  International women day vigil in Dhaka, Bangladesh. Photograph: Zakir Hossain Chowdhury/Barcroft Images    Women in Spain are staging a nationwide feminist strike seeking an end to sexual discrimination, domestic violence and the wage gap; while the Global women Strike campaign is marking its success in mobilising several movements. The prime minister, Theresa May, has announced a consultation on new measures to combat domestic abuse including tagging suspects, banning them from alcohol and drugs, and outlawing emotional and economic abuse. The TUC says women are still working 67 days a year for free because of the pay gap. Zoe Williams argues the only way to fix the Conservative partys feminist failings would be to attach a scrappy, energetic women who listened to reason to every blowhard man who didnt. Rebecca Solnit writes how #MeToo and #TimesUp have seized a moment that took decades to bring about. And heres why you dont have to be a Hollywood star to bring others along on the path to equality. Finally, we have set things up so you can tell us how are marking the day  we will publish a selection of the material submitted. * * * Fatal car crash  In news that broke overnight, two boys believed to be 17 were killed and two children were among the injured after a horror crash near Thirsk, East Yorkshire. Police said a black Ford Focus, a black Vauxhall Corsa and a green Volkswagen Bora were involved in the collision on the A61 between Busby Stoop and Carlton Minniott. Police have appealed for witnesses or anyone with dashcam footage to come forward. * * * Mysteries of Jupiter revealed  The Juno spacecraft orbiting Earths largest sibling has revealed how the storms and swirls on its surface spiral 3,000km down through an increasingly dense atmosphere where hydrogen becomes a metallic gas and helium turns to rain. Spectacular images of the phenomenal turbulence on Jupiters exterior have been returned by the probe.   s south pole is a mosaic of many images acquired by the Jovian InfraRed Auroral Mapper.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  This image of Jupiters south pole is a mosaic of many images acquired by the Jovian InfraRed Auroral Mapper. Photograph: Nasa    The normal concept of gas, liquid and solid dont really hold at these pressures, says Yohai Kaspi, one of the scientists involved in publishing the findings. At its core, Jupiter probably has an extremely dense soup of gases, speckled with metallic elements, researchers think. Pressures are about 10 million times higher than at the Earths surface.  * * * A few gifts too far?  The Westminster council deputy leader Robert Davis has stepped aside after he was revealed to have accepted hospitality or gifts 893 times over six years, frequently from property developers. Davis, who remains a councillor, argues the dinners, hotel stays, theatre tickets and trips abroad were all part of his job as planning committee chairman, and he had always rigorously declared them. Investigations by the council and an independent QC are under way. * * * Submarine case comes to court  The murder trial begins today of Peter Madsen, the Danish inventor accused of torturing and killing Swedish journalist Kim Wall during a trip on his homemade submarine. Madsen was once a celebrity for seeking to build a rocket and launch himself into suborbital space. Now he is accused by prosecutors of an unusual and extremely brutal murder in which he allegedly tied up, beat and stabbed her, sawed up her body, then sank the submarine to try to cover his tracks. Madsens trial is expected to run for 12 days. Lunchtime reading: Crimes of the police informer Gary Haggarty committed five murders, attempted another five, and engaged in 23 conspiracies to murder. As a UVF militiaman in Northern Ireland he also undertook arson attacks, beatings, hijackings and possessed small arsenals of firearms and explosives. The list of charges either admitted or taken into consideration goes on and on.     Gary Haggarty.    He got away with his crimes for so long because he was, in addition to these things, a servant of the British state, writes Ian Cobain. He was a police informer. In return for his cooperation, Haggartys effective sentence was whittled down to a few years jail. Cobain examines whether the information gleaned by the security forces from Haggarty and other touts on both the loyalist and republican sides was worth the terrible cost of their largely unpunished crimes. Sport Giorgio Chiellini, who defended for his life at Wembley, watched Juventus destroy Tottenham Hotspurs Champions League dream with a devastating onetwo punch and said the London club lacked the mental toughness to win matches at this most rarefied level. In Manchester, Gabriel Jesus was on target as a lacklustre Manchester City moved into the quarter-finals despite defeat on the night to Basel. England women hopes of lifting the SheBelieves Cup in Orlando were dashed by Karen Bardsleys second-half own goal in a 1-0 defeat to the USA. Pressure was building on Sir Dave Brailsford to resign from his position as head of Team Sky following the news that they face another major anti-doping investigation. Australian vice-captain David Warner has given a frank insight into his angry rant directed at South African wicketkeeper Quinton de Kock on the fourth day of the first Test in Durban. And Serena Williams, who survived a pulmonary embolism giving birth last year, has said her return to the Tour on International women Day after an absence of more than a year could not have come on a better day. Business The prospect of a trade war between the worlds two biggest economies increased after Chinas foreign minister warned of a necessary response should Donald Trump introduce tariffs on steel and aluminium imports. The comments by Wang Yi showed that China will not take the tariffs lying down although stock markets calmed overnight on suggestions the US may offer exemptions on the tariffs to Canada and Mexico. The FTSE100 looks like opening up slightly this morning, while the pound is buying $1.39 and 1.12. The papers The main story in town (unless you are the Express) is the Russian spy and the nerve agent attack in Salisbury that has also left a policeman seriously ill. The Mirror splashes with Cop poisoned by nerve gas assassins, calling it a Russian spy outrage. The Sun goes with Nerve agent horror while the Mail has the headline Russia could cripple UK and says the countrys cybersecurity chief has warned the Kremlin could shut down power supplies and hijack air traffic control.     Guardian front page, Thursday 8 March 2018.    The Telegraph has the lead Policeman poisoned by Russian spy nerve agent and quotes Boris Johnson promising a robust response if a foreign power is found to be responsible. The Guardian says the suspicion in Downing Street will be that the Kremlin has carried out another brazen attack on British soil. The Times says one line of inquiry is that the Russian spys daughter may recently and unwittingly have brought a present for him from Moscow. And the i says the policeman is in a coma after coming into contact with a rare nerve agent that was used for the first time in the UK. Lastly the FT has a bit about the Russia spy drama but leads on Brussels rebuffing Theresa Mays latest plan and warning of the inevitable friction over Brexit. Sorry, really lastly, the Express leads with Corrie star Bill: my heartbreak. Sign up     data-form-description=\"Sign up and get a daily briefing from the Guardian\" scrolling=\"no\" seamless frameborder=\"0\" class=\"iframed--overflow-hidden email-sub__iframe js-email-sub__iframe js-email-sub__iframe--article\" data-form-success-desc=\"Thanks for signing up\">   The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. For more news: www.theguardian.com"
"95""The last time Rken Renas saw her friend Anna Campbell, they were heading by coach into Afrin, northern Syria, to help defend the besieged Kurdish city from Turkish attack. We had stopped for a break and I spotted her chewing sunflower seeds in the sun, recalled Renas, a 26-year-old Londoner who asked to be called only by her Kurdish nom de guerre for fear of legal reprisals when she returns to the UK. When I asked what she was planning to do, she said, Im going to fight. But with Afrin on the brink of being completely overrun by Turkish-backed rebels, plus rumours of torture and mutilation of captives, Renas had heard her commanders were withdrawing female fighters for their safety. When I told her this she just laughed and said, Well see when I get there. Then she gave me a big hug and got on her coach. She was killed a week later  one of the bravest women I have ever met. Anna Campbell, 26, from Lewes, East Sussex, became the first British women to die while fighting alongside Kurdish forces in Syria when the convoy she was travelling in was hit by a Turkish airstrike on 16 March. Now, Renas  one of a handful of British women fighting with the all-female Kurdish women protection units (YPJ) in Syria  has come forward to urge Britain to do more to support Syrias Kurds as they defend their homeland from Turkish attack or thousands of people could die. There needs to be more international pressure to stop Turkeys incursion into Rojava, she says, referring to the semi-autonomous heartland of Syrias Kurds. Rojavas [feminist and socialist] revolution is under threat of being completely extinguished by Turkey. We need government support, we need civil support. The world must not remain silent on what is happening here.  Renas spent almost a month over two deployments in Afrin at the height of a seven-week siege that ended last Sunday as Turkish-backed rebels took control of the city. I have never seen anything like it in all my life, she said from her military base in the Kurdish city of Qamishli, where her unit has repaired since escaping the city. It was chaos. The bombing was really heavy, especially just before the city fell. They hit the hospital, people were fleeing. I was helping out at the hospital and bodies were just coming in day after day. Seeing women screaming, fainting. Mothers who have lost their sons, daughters who have lost their fathers. These were civilians, not soldiers. It was heartbreaking.    ken Renas.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Rken Renas. Photograph: Collect    Describing herself as a Marxist, the computer technician says she deployed to Afrin with the International Freedom Battalion (IFB), an armed group of foreign communists, anarchists and socialists fighting Isis under the aegis of Syrias Kurdish peoples protection units (YPG) and its all-female affiliate the YPJ. Turkey launched its ground and air offensive  codenamed Operation Olive Branch  on Afrin on 20 January in an attempt to prevent the YPG from establishing a foothold along its border. Ankara argues that the YPG is linked to its own Kurdistan Workers party (PKK), which has waged an insurgency on Turkish soil since 1984. The US, EU and Britain, however, do not consider the YPG a terrorist group, and have supported the Kurds fight against Isis since 2014. There are already suggestions that Afrin holds terrible secrets. In early February, Syrian Kurds accused Turkish-backed rebels of mutilating then filming the body of a YPJ fighter after a video emerged of her corpse. I dont think women were in any more danger than men, says Renas. But how we die is different. She claims the Turkish-backed rebels employed similar tactics to Islamic State. They would ignore YPG points, bypass them, and make a beeline straight for the women-only YPJ points. Where captured YPG male fighters would often be beaten or tortured to death, for women it would be much worse. I dont even want to repeat it, but just really vicious, nasty things. Sexual stuff, not just violence. I think its just a deep hatred for women who are free.  Nevertheless, she too convinced her commander to allow her to stay in Afrin to guard a women refuge on its outskirts until it fell last Sunday, when she caught one of the last convoys out of the city  the same day Campbell was killed. Renas says she was first drawn to Syria after seeing the atrocities Isis were committing against civilians in Iraq and Syria. My mothers family are from Iraq and watching Isis try to destroy not just the Levant, but attack Europe as well, made me so angry, she said. I felt I had to do something. But rather than travel to Iraq, she chose northern Syria, so powerfully struck was she by the grassroots egalitarian and feminist revolution that has risen there from the rubble of Syrias civil war. They have built a system of direct democracy and gender equality in the heart of the Middle East, she says. The region has suffered war and oppression for decades. But in Rojava life is completely different. The people here are tasting freedom for the first time, not just the Kurds, but Arabs and Assyrians too.  She adds: I come from a communist family and have grown up around communism and its ideas my whole life. I went to Rojava to show international solidarity and to defend people from fascism and the forces of tyranny and oppression. She arrived in Rojava in September, where she completed the IFBs mandatory month-long military training course  in which new recruits learn basic Kurdish, weaponry and battlefield tactics on top of a crash course in the ideology of Rojava  and joined an infantry division, comprising leftist fighters from around the world.  There she was given the nom de guerre Rken Renas  Kurdish for she who smiles  and spent her first few months working in civil society, moving from town to town to help set up communes and women groups, and providing aid to bereaved families.  It was during this time that she met Campbell, who was attached to YPJ International, a separate all-female battalion of foreign fighters. Anna and I were the same age, from the same country, both leftwing, although she was an anarchist and Im a communist, she says. We got on really well. But, she says, Campbell was growing frustrated that her YPJ commanders were refusing to let her fight. They are reluctant to send foreign women to battle because we have other skills, like communication, technology or social media skills, says Renas. But all she wanted was to defend Rojava and the revolution. And when Turkey attacked Afrin, she kept badgering. She was immensely strong and never took any crap. In the end, they gave in.  While she managed to persuade her commanders to send her to Afrin, she describes getting to the front as a constant battle. A lot of people think its like Call of Duty, she adds. In fact, I only know one foreign fighter with a confirmed kill. No, theres a lot of waiting, dodging bullets and airstrikes. But when I did get there, it was heavy. Renas says she and her colleagues now face a tense wait to see what Turkey does next. The thinking on the ground is that theyll attack Manbij next and make their way inwards. If they come to the rest of Rojava, its going to be a complete and utter bloodbath. Thousands could die. She says she would like to stay in Rojava, and fight if she has to, for some months before she returns back to the UK.  I do want to go home but I cant say when because Im worried about prosecution, says Renas. I know that other volunteers have been persecuted by the state for going to fight Isis, she says. Two men have so far been charged under the terrorism act in the UK for joining the YPG. I dont want that and I dont want to go to jail. But if I have to then Ill do it. It would still be worth it. Prosecuting me, and others like me, would just show the hypocrisy of the British state, she adds.  Its been involved in many foreign conflicts abroad, not least Iraq which was an illegal war. Yet, I find the fact that British citizens are supposedly not allowed to join foreign wars quite rich coming from the British government."
"96""Hurricane Maria lifted a veil from our eyes, said Carmen Yuln Cruz, her broad smile and warm manner belying the steely edge to her voice. We are awake to our inequity  and our inequality, the mayor of Puerto Ricos capital city of San Juan told the Guardian on a recent visit to a political summit in Baltimore. 
The storm in September plunged Puerto Rico into darkness and tainted the drinking water. Homes were flooded, crushed or swept away. Debris blanketed the streets and people died, while aid delivery was slow to reach its shores. 
 
  Related: How Hurricane Maria forced Puerto Ricans to change their hair  
 
Six months later, the island, a commonwealth of the US, is struggling. Tens of thousands of Puerto Ricans still lack access to power, water and permanent shelter. The rate of suicide has climbed. Meanwhile, officials there warn of an exodus of Puerto Ricans abandoning the island for the mainland. 
Cruz, who rose to prominence as an unsparing critic of the Trump administration in the hours after Maria made landfall, said the halting and, in her view, neglectful federal response to the crushing devastation on Puerto Rico was a glaring reminder of the islands status as a US territory. 
Despite her fighting words during the immediate crisis and her calm determination to get social justice for Puerto Rico now, she has been changed forever by the storm, she said. 
In the storms aftermath, Cruz positioned herself as a leading voice of the Puerto Rican people. When then acting secretary of homeland security Elaine Duke declared the island was a good news story in terms of the progress that had been made on the island Cruz fired back during an interview on CNN: Damn it, this is not a good news story. 
Her brusque criticism of the administration won her support among those on the island  as well as a number of detractors, including one at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. Donald Trump decried Cruzs poor leadership and disparaged her as nasty, an epithet he once directed at Hillary Clinton.  
Im not the same person I was on 20 September of last year. None of us are, Cruz said. Weve all changed. We look at life with different eyes. I presume in a way were better because were also hardened.  
 
  
   
    
  
  
 
Born in San Juan in 1963, Cruz demonstrated talent and political ambition from a young age, first as president of her high school student council and then as a representative at a presidential youth summit. Like many Puerto Ricans, Cruz left the island to pursue her studies in the mainland US, where she earned a bachelors degree in political science from Boston University and a masters in public management and policy at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. 
Cruz was born in San Juan in 1963. She studied and worked for Corporate America on the US mainland in her youth, before returning to Puerto Rico and getting closer to politics. She began working for Sila Mara Caldern, the mayor of San Juan, who would later become governor. 
Then, in 2012, Cruz ran for mayor. She was late to enter the race and few knew her name, much less gave her a chance of winning. She advocated for gender equality, LGBT rights, disabled rights and a municipal plan for universal healthcare. That November, she defeated a three-term incumbent to become San Juans third female mayor. She won re-election in 2016. 
In the wake of the hurricane, Cruz parried speculation about whether she has ambition for higher office, such as the governorship. But lately she has been less dismissive. 
In an interview with Radio Isla this week, Cruz said her name will be on a ballot in 2020, though she would not say if she would run for a third-term as mayor or seek the governorship.  
Cruz disagrees with Puerto Rican officials who have accused the Trump administration of neglecting the island because it does not appear on the electoral map. 
One word: Katrina, she said, implying that the Bush administrations response to the 2005 storm that flooded New Orleans and left hundreds of people dead showed the US government could just as easily ignore the needs of a state. 
Long before Maria made landfall, Puerto Rico was mired in economic crisis. In May of last year, the island, crushed by more than $70bn in public debt, filed for bankruptcy.  
In November, the islands governor asked Congress to approve $94.4bn in disaster relief to rebuild the island, strengthen its infrastructure and restore its power grid. US lawmakers have so far appropriated only a fraction of that request. 
Cruz has returned to Washington multiple times in the past few months to brief lawmakers on the humanitarian situation in Puerto Rico and urge Congress to provide the island with more relief.  
She supports a so-called Marshall plan for the island, introduced by progressive senators Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren and Kirsten Gillibrand, that would help Puerto Rico pay off its debt and provide additional funding for healthcare, transportation and education. 
 
 n Cruz hugs a women during her visit to an elderly home in San Juan on 22 September 2017.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  Carmen Yuln Cruz hugs a women during her visit to an elderly home in San Juan on 22 September 2017. 
  Photograph: Thais Llorca/EPA 
  
 
Earlier this month, Cruz spoke on a panel at the Congressional Progressive Caucus strategy summit in Baltimore alongside New York congresswomen Nydia Velzquez, a Democrat who was born in Puerto Rico, and Stacey Plaskett, the Virgin Islands delegate to Congress. 
Im not known for being politically correct, Cruz teased the audience, taking a seat onstage. Im just going to say two things about President Trump, she continued, drawing laughs. The American people have a big heart. Trump has a big mouth. 
She lashed out again at Trump for the unfathomable action of throwing paper towels at us and for tweeting from a golf course in Mar-a-Lago while Puerto Ricans suffered. 
But the message she wanted to impart to the room: We are still dying. Not in the great numbers like they were before, but we are dying. Those deaths cannot be forgotten. Those lives cannot just flicker and not be remembered. So help us. 
The White House has defended its handling of the disaster, and Trump rated his administrations response 10 out of 10. 
Cruz said, advocating for the plan: This is not the first time the US looks at a country that has debt and forgives it. This is not the first time that the US says it is in our best interest to make sure that things go this way and not the other. Puerto Rico deserves no less. If the US did that in world war two, why wouldnt they do it for a country that they made citizens of the US in 1917? 
As the recovery continues in the months and years ahead, Cruz does not hesitate to say she will speak out when necessary and leverage her national platform to crusade for the people of Puerto Rico. 
 I didnt do anything special, Cruz said. I did what had to be done. And I would do it again and again."
"97""Top story: Labour leader instinctively hostile to Jews Hello. Im Martin Farrer and these are the top stories from the Guardian this Monday morning. Jeremy Corbyn has apologised for pockets of antisemitism in the Labour party as he attempts to shut down renewed claims of slurs and discrimination against Jewish people in the party. The accusations have dogged Corbyns leadership of the party and flared again at the weekend when he expressed regret for apparently showing support for the creator of an antisemitic mural in the East End of London six years ago. But Jewish leaders piled the pressure on Corbyn by issuing a strongly worded open letter accusing him of siding with antisemites and being ideologically fixed within a far-left worldview that is instinctively hostile to mainstream Jewish communities. They also asked supporters to stage a show of solidarity outside parliament today as Labour MPs hold their weekly meeting. In his own statement on Sunday night, Corbyn said he was sincerely sorry for the pain which has been caused and said Labour was campaigning to increase support and confidence among Jewish people in the UK. Our columnist Matthew dAncona says Corbyns apology doesnt go far enough. * * * Data row engulfs Brexit campaign  Things arent much better for Theresa May, who faces growing pressure today to launch an investigation into what members of her cabinet and her staff knew about links between the controversial data company Cambridge Analytica and the pro-Brexit campaign. Pro-remain campaigners have written to the prime minister to demand an inquiry after a whistleblower told the Observer that Vote Leave channelled 625,000 through another campaign to a firm linked to Cambridge Analytica in a potential breach of electoral law. The allegations mean that Boris Johnson and Michael Gove, the leading Brexiters in cabinet, will face pressure to reveal what they knew about the finances of Vote Leave. Meanwhile, May has also been criticised after Downing Street was accused of outing the whistleblower, Shahmir Sanni, as gay. Sanni said his family in Pakistan, where homosexuality is criminalised, may now be in danger.  * * *    60 Minutes program\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Stormy Daniels is interviewed by Anderson Cooper for CBS News 60 Minutes program. Photograph: Reuters    Leave Trump alone  Stormy Daniels, the adult film star who says she had sex with Donald Trump in 2006, claimed last night that she was threatened with physical violence after she first attempted to go public with the story. After arranging to sell the story of her alleged relationship with the future president, Daniels, whose real name is Stephanie Clifford, says she was approached by a man in a car park in Las Vegas in 2011 who told her: Leave Trump alone. Daniels told CBS television that the man leaned around and looked at my daughter and said, Thats a beautiful little girl. Itd be a shame if something happened to her mom. Daniels has gone public with her claims despite signing a non-disclosure agreement with Trumps lawyer in return for $130,000 in hush money. She told CBS that she signed the agreement out of concern for my family and their safety. You can read the key excerpts here and analysis from our Washington reporter Ben Jacobs in which he concludes that the affair shows how far US politics has sunk.  * * * Double hit for north  The childrens commissioner has called on the government to put the needs of northern children at the heart of its northern powerhouse project after a report found youngsters faced a double whammy of familial disadvantage and poor institutional performance. The study also found that up to 15% of children in some areas of the north are dropping out of education and training before they are 18 despite new laws aimed at encouraging them to stay longer. It also revealed that many children, especially girls, felt they would benefit from regeneration projects in towns and cities that only produced a few shiny buildings. * * * I see myself as British  Sarah OConnor has lived in the UK for 51 years. She went to school here and has worked all her life, paying tax and national insurance, and married and had children here. But now she faces being deported to Jamaica, the country she left when she was six, because she doesnt have the paperwork needed to obtain a British passport. It seems barely conceivable that it could happen but, as our reporter Amelia Gentleman explains, OConnor is one of many people who arrived as children from Commonwealth countries in the 1960s and are now facing problems as a result of a hardline immigration policy known as hostile environment. Its so ridiculous, she says.  * * * And Smith must go  Pressure is growing on the Australian cricket captain, Steve Smith, after he admitted tampering with the match ball in the third Test against South Africa. Jason Gillespie, the former Test bowler, joined the ranks of former players calling for Smith to be stripped of the captaincy, arguing that it was impossible to envisage a scenario in which he stays in the job. Smith has been banned by the ICC for the final match of the series, which Australia trails 2-1, and remains in South Africa where Cricket Australia is carrying out its own investigation into the affair. Meanwhile, British newspapers made hay at the humiliation of the Ashes-winning skipper, with the Mirror trumpeting Clown Under on its back page.  Lunchtime read: Why the 2000s was cinemas greatest decade      The Shrek franchise was part of the new golden age of animation. Photograph: Reuters    Asked what was the best decade for film-making, many critics would no doubt plump for the 70s and point to the two Godfather films, Scorseses first films and the dawn of the Spielberg/Lucas hegemony. But thats not what our film critic Peter Bradshaw has opted for, instead kicking off a series of essays about the best decades by nominating the 2000s. This was, he says, the decade when digital technology helped cinema to become reborn and gave us the Lord of the Rings trilogy, a golden age of animation (Shrek, The Incredibles et al) and the emergence of the Taiwanese director Ang Lee with his influential Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon. Throw in the brilliant run of films by the great noughties auteur Michael Haneke (Hidden, The White Ribbon among others), the Coen brothers classic No Country for Old Men and Paul Thomas Andersons masterly There Will Be Blood, and there is the case for the defence. Sport In another cricket match, England are hanging on in the first Test against New Zealand. The hosts require three more wickets to win after Ben Stokes lost his head and his wicket moments ago in the last over before tea. Follow our live blog here here. Manu Tuilagis hopes of making his England return on the summer tour of South Africa have been dealt a significant blow after he sustained the latest in a long line of injuries during Leicesters nail-biting win against Wasps. Just when it seemed the 2018 edition of the Masters had been afforded sufficient pre-tournament storylines, enter Bubba Watson, who enjoyed a comfortable success at the WGC Match Play in Austin. Ronnie OSullivan fired another broadside at snookers numpties after coasting to a record-equalling fifth ranking title of the season at the Ladbrokes Players Championship. Business MPs investigating the collapse of Carillion says the companys bosses were more interested in collecting more pay and bonuses than keeping the business on an even keel. Our columnist Polly Toynbee says it shows how the outsourcing industry is a busted flush. Asian shares have had another tough overnight session over fears of a US-China trade war but there are signs that Washington is prepared to back down in some key areas. The FTSE100 is set to fall 0.4% at the open, while the pound was up to $1.416 and 1.145. The papers Cheating Australian cricketers dominate the back pages today, but on the fronts  as is customary on a Monday  it is a bit of a mixed bag. The Guardian splashes on the equality watchdog warning companies that they will end up in court if they fail to report their gender pay gap.      The Guardian front page, Monday 26 March 2018. Photograph: The Guardian    The Mails headline is: Dont let vultures destroy a British colossus. It is not a story about pigeons and Nelsons Column but a hedge fund that wants to buy GKN, the firm that made Spitfires. The Times leads on Jeremy Hunt calling the NHS budget crazy as he launches a 10-year spending deal and backs moves for a ringfenced tax. The Express also leads on the NHS with a story about the PM under pressure from Tories over health spending.  Theresa May also features on the front page of the Financial Times, which leads with: May battles to keep Britain in EUs 10bn Euro Galileo satellite programme. The Telegraph, meanwhile, focuses on Labour: Jewish leaders say Corbyn is hostile. Over at the red tops, the Sun leads with a crime story and the Mirror splashes on the story of a man who was paralysed in the Manchester bombing who has regained movement in his legs. For more news: www.theguardian.com Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here."
"98""A new wave of feminist change is gathering and women need to be prepared for the backlash, former Australian prime minister Julia Gillard has said. Speaking at the launch of the Global Institute for women Leadership, which she will be chairing, she said those who say feminism has already gone too far only needed to look at the statistics, which show gender equality is not just slow but is in some cases actually reversing.  The institute at Kings College London aims to better understand why women continue to be underrepresented in leadership positions, making up just 23% of national parliamentarians, 26% of news media leaders, 27% of judges, 15% of corporate board members and 9% of senior IT leaders around the world.  Reflecting on her own time as the first female prime minister of Australia when Gillard famously called then opposition leader Tony Abbott out on his own sexism and misogyny in a speech that went viral, she said she regrets not bringing it up sooner.   Related: Gender pay gap figures reveal eight in 10 UK firms pay men more    I made a mistake in thinking the interest in my gender would peak in the early days that I was prime minister and then it would flatten out, which would not be without abuse as we play our politics pretty hard in Australia but I thought it would be the normal amplitudes for what passes as discourse in Australian politics. She said instead the gendered insults  including being called a bitch and mocked for being childless  became the go-to weapon, but because she hadnt brought it up before critics said she was only doing it because the government was in trouble. She said: What you saw in that speech, which came from a place of cool anger, was me showing for the first time the frustration that came with that. While its gone on to be remembered as a good speech, which Im very thankful for and a lot of women talk to me about it, it was actually recorded in Australian politics as a dreadful error. The commentators said I had alienated men. When I finally called out the gender side of things, it didnt play well for me. Gillard believes things will be easier for the next female prime minister. I think perhaps everyone learnt some lessons from the experience of the first. I think for the next women there will be things that happened to me that wont happen to her, she said. However, Gillard believes that when the Australian parliament finally reaches equal representation, it wont become gentler. We play our politics fairly aggressively in Australia and I wanted to show that a women could hold her own there, she said. Were not going to wake up in a kumbaya world. Gillard said there has never been a better time to tackle the issues of gender inequality, calling the #MeToo and Times Up movements an explosion of activity and energy. Even before [them], I thought you could get the sense that another wave of feminist change is building. I feel it is gathering and I think the launch of this institute is coming at exactly the right time to feed in as the wave gathers, she said. However she added that it would be naive to not recognise there will also be a straight up backlash from people who just dont want change and that social media will play a part in fuelling it. Gillard believes society is getting better at describing the problems, and the UKs gender pay gap reporting is an example of that, but its the evidence based solutions to help governments and companies create change that are lacking and more rigorous research is needed.  The institute has found that over the past decade, the number of women in senior management positions has almost stalled in the past decade, only rising by 1%, and it has been estimated that it will take 216 years until women have the same pay and employment opportunities as men. She said: A large number of people are trying to make a difference and millions of pounds are being spent on things like women empowerment, women leadership and unconscious bias training but we arent seeing the results because the interventions they are funding are not effective. Gillard added that issues such as how race and class impact women would inevitably be a major component of what the institute will do. "
"99""According to an ever-growing number of young men in Europe, the United States and across the Muslim world, we are at the beginning of a war. And no one knows how it will end. To me, what is interesting in the paragraph you just read is not the indeterminacy of the outcome. All crises are like that. No, it is the fact that ever-growing number of young men probably does not seem notable to most readers.  The fact is that virtually all of those mobilizing on all sides of this growing clash are young men  whether right-wing extremists, anti-immigrant zealots, anti-Muslim skinheads and neo-Nazis or young Muslims readying for jihad.    and Out ofViolent Extremism&lt;span class='byline'&gt;Michael Kimmel&lt;/span&gt;&lt;span class='publisher'&gt;University of California Press&lt;/span&gt;&lt;/h1&gt;&lt;a href='target='_parent' class='button'&gt;Learn more &lt;svg viewBox=&quot;0 0 50 50&quot; class=&quot;arrow&quot;&gt; &lt;path class=&quot;cls-1&quot; d=&quot;M38.65,25.58L37,27.21h0L26.79,37.44l-1.1-1.11,8.53-10.19H12.5V23.86H34.22L25.69,13.67l1.1-1.1L37,22.79h0l1.63,1.63v1.16Z&quot;/&gt; &lt;/svg&gt;&lt;/a&gt;        &lt;/div&gt; &lt;/div&gt; &lt;style&gt; .wrapper{ padding: 4px 0; position: relative; display: flex; max-width: 380px; border-top: 1px solid #dfdfdf; border-bottom: 1px solid #dfdfdf; background-color: #fff; }  .copyright { font-family: 'Guardian Text Sans Web'; font-size: 14px; line-height: 1.3; color: #676767; max-width: 380px; }  h1{ font-family: 'Guardian Egyptian Web', Georgia, serif; font-weight: 900; color: #ad0006; font-style: normal; font-size: 20px; line-height: 1.1; margin: 0; }  .intro { color: #121212; display: block; }  .byline { font-style: italic; display: block; }  .boxout-primary-content{ margin-bottom: 24px; font-family: 'Guardian Text Sans Web', sans-serif; color: #ad0006; font-size: 14px; line-height: 1.3; }  .logo { max-width: 140px; width: 100%; height: auto; margin-right: 10px; align-self: start; }  body, html { margin: 0 }  .arrow { position: absolute; right: 4px; top: 0; bottom: 0; height: 100%; transition: all 0.2s ease-out; }  .arrow path { fill: #333; }  .button { position: absolute; bottom: 4px; font-family: 'Guardian Text Sans Web'; font-weight: 900; font-size: 16px; text-decoration: none; background-color: #ffe500; color: #333; border-radius: 24px; padding: 8px 42px 8px 12px; transition: background 0.2s ease-out; }  .button:hover { background-color: #e8d209; }  .publisher { color: #999; font-family: 'Guardian Text Sans Web'; font-size: 16px; font-weight: normal; line-height: 18px; }  .button:hover .arrow { right: 0px; }  @font-face { font-family: &quot;Guardian Egyptian Web&quot;; src: url(&quot;format(&quot;woff2&quot;), url(&quot;format(&quot;woff&quot;), url(&quot;format(&quot;truetype&quot;); font-weight: 900; font-style: normal; }  @font-face { font-family: &quot;Guardian Egyptian Web&quot;; src: url(&quot;format(&quot;woff2&quot;), url(&quot;format(&quot;woff&quot;), url(&quot;format(&quot;truetype&quot;); font-weight: 900; font-style: italic; }  @font-face { font-family: &quot;Guardian Text Sans Web&quot;; src: url(&quot;src: url(&quot;format(&quot;embedded-opentype&quot;), url(&quot;format(&quot;woff2&quot;), url(&quot;format(&quot;woff&quot;), url(&quot;format(&quot;truetype&quot;), url(&quot;format(&quot;svg&quot;); font-weight: normal; font-style: normal; font-stretch: normal; } &lt;/style&gt;&lt;/body&gt;&lt;/html&gt;\">   Its so obvious, it barely needs noting. And so it isnt noted. If we imagine for a moment that all those amassing on all the different sides of this looming cataclysm, all those drifting to the edges of the political spectrum and toward violent extremism, were female, would there be any other story? Wouldnt magazines be filled with individual profiles, TV news shows highlighting the relationship between femininity and violence, bookshelves sagging from the weight of the gender analysis? Yet the fact that virtually every single violent extremist is male creates hardly a ripple. It can be easy to think: But wait, what about those female suicide bombers? What about those skinhead girls? Those women of the Klan?  This proves my point. We notice the minuscule percentage of female activists. We over-notice them precisely because they are so counterintuitive.    divider   I have interviewed over 100 current or former extremists, including American neo-Nazis and white supremacists, jihadists and Islamists in Canada and Great Britain, and anti-immigration skinheads in Europe, to understand how they experience masculinity on the extreme right. I heard many stories of what I came to call aggrieved entitlement: a gendered sense of entitlement thwarted by larger economic and political shifts, their ambitions choked, their masculinity lost. Young men often come into extremist movements because they experience downsizing, outsourcing or economic displacement in specifically gendered ways: they feel themselves to be emasculated. This political-economic emasculation is often accompanied by a more personal sense of emasculation: they come because they are isolated or bullied in school and feel they need the support of something much bigger than they are.  Joining rightwing groups lent a gendered coherence to their sense of emasculation and frustration. Their manhood had been taken from them by unseen conspiratorial forces, and their recruitment was seen as a way to reclaim their manhood and to restore that sense of entitlement. Proving ones masculinity plays a central role in recruitment, or entry, into the movement. Entry is a gendered effort to ward off the shame that comes with their failures  their failures as men. The emotion of shame is the primary or ultimate cause of all violence, writes psychiatrist James Gilligan in his stunning book Violence. The purpose of violence is to diminish the intensity of shame and replace it as far as possible with its opposite, pride, thus preventing the individual from being overwhelmed by the feeling of shame. Its not just that they are male  anatomically so, chromosomally so  but that they see themselves as men. They enter feeling like failed men, like men who need to prove their masculinity, need to feel like real men, yet are thwarted at every turn.  The ex-Nazis, jihadists and white supremacists I have interviewed felt like failures as men. But instead of turning that sense of emasculation inward toward depression, interpersonal violence, suicide or self-medication through drugs or alcohol, these young men were somehow convinced to externalize their sense of emasculation, turn it into righteous political rage and lash out at those forces that they came to believe responsible for their emasculation. Their failure was not theirs as individuals; it was something done to them  by an indifferent state, by predatory corporations and rapacious bankers, by a host of others who had preyed upon global sympathies to get special bargains. They were not failures; they were victims. It is this sense of victimhood  that they are the new victims of the politically correct, multicultural society  that lends a degree of righteousness to their political activities. Once inside, these men developed a worldview that constantly shored up their own sense of masculinity through the emasculation of the others.   divider   I do not suggest that once we understand gender, we will fully understand the lure of violent extremism. Of course not. We still need to take many other factors into account.  A host of structural variables provide much of the foundation of extremism, including economic displacement in an increasingly interconnected global economy, the threats to  or collapse of  domestic patriarchy (wives working, children getting an education that circumvents paternal authority), political marginalization. On to this foundation we add the psychological variables: childhood trauma, bullying, child abuse, sexual abuse. women employment and education have also set dramatic changes in motion.But I argue that we cannot fully understand violent extremist movements without a gender analysis. And, more than that, we cannot adequately meet this challenge without understanding how gender  masculinity  is so deeply and intimately enmeshed in participants experience. There is a gendered political psychology of extremism: that the men who join do experience the need for camaraderie and community; the threats to a solid, grounded identity; the desire for a life of meaning and purpose; and the inability or obstacles to achieving that life as specifically gendered feelings urges and emotion. Just for a moment, then, lets pay attention to gender and see where it takes us.   divider   So this is how it works: These young men feel entitled to a sense of belonging and community, of holding unchallenged moral authority over women and children, and of feeling that they count in the world and that their lives matter.  Experiencing threats to the lives they feel they deserve leads these young men to feel ashamed and humiliated. And it is this aggrieved entitlement  entitlement thwarted and frustrated  that leads some men to search for a way to redeem themselves as men, to restore and retrieve that sense of manhood that has been lost. Joining up is a form of masculine compensation, an alternate route to proving manhood. To not see this as gendered is to miss the point. Journalists and researchers usually start by focusing on the content of radical extremist ideology and then work backward to search for the fertile political and economic ground in which such hateful ideologies can take root.  Such research strategies can explain long-term political and economic causes, but they cant explain the filter mechanisms by which thousands experience the same political and economic circumstances yet only a handful are smitten by the cause. It is common to then move immediately from these large-scale macro-level explanations to an individual psychopathology model. There must be something wrong with these particular guys, something in their family life or their upbringing.  It seems possible  probable  that their fathers beat them, abandoned them, were implacably ruthless with them. Or perhaps the boys were victims of abuse and bullying from male peers. Psychological reductionism runs rampant as an explanation of violent extremism, but it begs the same question as the overly macro-level structural explanation: in the vast universe of kids who are abused, beat up, abandoned, bullied and otherwise mistreated by a hostile world, why do only a few of them ever blow themselves up as suicide bombers or begin training to defend the white race from outsiders?  Why these particular boys and men and not all the others? In a sense, these two explanations turn understanding on its head. We need to ask why there are so few who end up in extremist movements, not why there are so many.  After all, there are thousands  no, hundreds of thousands  of boys in America who are bullied and gay-baited every single day. Yet they dont pick up assault weapons and pull a Columbine in every middle and high school in the land. So we need to ask what are the structural features of those schools where they do pick up assault weapons, as well as the psychological characteristics of those particular boys. What mediates between these over-deterministic structural explanations and the reductionist psychopathological ones is gender.  Masculinity. It is the specific ways that specific groups of young men understand and enact masculinity that help us navigate between the macro and micro, between the structural and the psychological.  Its within the gendered connection between humiliation and violence where we will find the key to understanding how some young men get into extremist politics and, therefore, how we, as policymakers, civil and community leaders, parents, religious leaders and citizens, can provide a route they can use to get out.   divider   We need to explore the experience of deep emotional connection, belonging, compensation for shame and humiliation, and purpose and mission in life  the sense of finally living a life of glory and strength and power  that provides the emotional nutrients that generate a breeding ground for young men eager and energized to prove their manhood. For the extreme rightwingers, theirs is a movement not to take power, but to restore authority to its rightful heirs  us, not them. To restore what was, and what should have been. And, in the process, to restore their manhood. It is through their participation in the movement that they see an opportunity to retrieve that sense of masculinity that has been stolen from them by illegitimate poseurs and their government and its corporate henchmen. Challenging violent extremism, therefore, means engaging these young men as men, not simply as jihadists or neo-Nazis or white supremacists. It means offering them new ways by which they can prove their masculinity, to feel that they are real men  that their lives matter. These are young men who feel small, who resent being made to feel small and who are looking to get big by destroying others. They search, sometimes literally, for that magic bullet that will make them a real man.  Excerpt taken from Healing from Hate: How Young Men Get Into  and Out of  Violent Extremism by Michael Kimmel, published by University of California Press in April 2018 "
"100""Top story: 80% of firms pay men more, data shows Good morning. This is Martin Farrer with all the news you need this Thursday morning. The size of the gender pay gap has been laid bare as the governments midnight deadline revealed that eight out of 10 companies and public-sector bodies pay men more than women. The data collected so far showed that women were being paid a median hourly rate that, on average, was 9.8% less than that given to their male colleagues. By last night 2,920 companies and public-sector organisations, of a total of 9,788 which had filed, had reported a pay gap that was above the national median of 18.4%. The government would not say how many organisations are required to take part but it covers employers with 250 or more staff. Some of the worst offending companies included Ryanair, Apple and JP Morgan, while the sectors with the largest gaps were construction, finance and insurance, and education. Public-sector organisations had an earlier deadline to report of 30 March and the figures suggested nine in 10 paid men more than women, with an overall gender pay gap of 14%. A Guardian analysis of the data shows that organisations with more women in the boardroom have a lower gap. * * * 50th killing  Londons bloody year shows no signs of abating after two suspected killings in the capital yesterday took the total for the year to 50. A man suffering from stab wounds was found by police in Hackney last night but, despite being given first aid, he died at the scene. The victim was believed to be in his early 20s. Earlier in the day, also in Hackney, a man in his 50s died outside a bookmakers after a suspected fight. Cressida Dick, the Met police commissioner, has blamed social media for the rise in killings, particularly among young people, saying trivial disputes could escalate into violence within minutes. * * * Poison challenge  Russia will today attempt to press home the diplomatic advantage handed to it by a series of blunders by the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, and his officials in the standoff over the posioning of the former spy Sergei Skripal. Russia accuses Britain of overstating its case that Moscow was responsible for the attack and Johnson was forced to backtrack from a claim that the UKs chemical weapons watchdog had told him Russia was definitely to blame. It later said it could not say for certain that the nerve agent used was of Russian origin. The Foreign Office also admitted it had earlier deleted a tweet making a similar inaccurate claim to Johnson. Emboldened by the missteps, Russia has called a special meeting of the UN security council for later today when it intends to challenge a letter previously sent to the UN by Theresa May that asserted that Russia was likely to have been behind the attack in Salisbury. * * * Zuckerberg mea culpa  Facebook has revealed that the data of up to 87 million people may have been improperly shared with Cambridge Analytica. The figure, which is 37 million more than previously reported, was buried at the end of a blogpost on Wednesday by the companys chief technology officer, Mike Schroepfer, which also provided updates on the changes Facebook was making to better protect users. Mark Zuckerberg, Facebooks founder, said later: We didnt take a broad enough view on what our responsibility was and that was a huge mistake. That was my mistake. * * *   s triathlon on the Gold Coast today.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Competitors including gold medallist Flora Duffy of Bermuda, foreground, leap into the water at the start of the women triathlon on the Gold Coast today. Photograph: Mark Schiefelbein/AP    Gday!  The Commonwealth Games have got under way on the Gold Coast today. The first gold medal went to Bermudas Flora Duffy, who edged out Englands Jessica Learmonth in the women triathlon. There was a real shock in the mens event where Englands all-conquering Brownlee brothers finished out of the medals, the gold going to Henri Schoeman of South Africa, who finished third in the Olympics in Rio two years ago. The big news locally is the withdrawal of Australian 100m hurdles star Sally Pearson through injury. The 2012 Olympic gold medallist was the face of the Games but has pulled out with an Achilles problem. As regards the action, theres cycling, weightlifting, bowls and much more to come. You can follow it all with our live blog here.  * * * AI boycott  Killer robots still seems the stuff of science fiction, but a group of academics are sufficiently worried about them that they have called for a boycott of a South Korean university over its work on artificial intelligence with the defence manufacturer Hanwha Systems. The researchers from more than 30 countries say they will not collaborate with the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology and Hanwha over fears they sought to accelerate the arms race to develop autonomous weapons. Lunchtime read: How to live with being a killer     Jonathan Izard Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian    In January 2016, a 74-year-old man died after being knocked down by a car in Norfolk. The death of Michael Rawson, a retired linguistics expert with a passion for classical music and photography, was another addition to Britains road accident statistics. But for the driver of the car, BBC newsreader Jonathan Izard, it meant that nothing would ever be the same again as he tried to come to grips with why the accident had happened, meeting friends of his victim and, above all, coping with being a killer despite being cleared of blame by the inquest. I struggle daily with the riddle of how to go on living as the person I have become, he says in the Guardian today as he writes about his experiences. He has also made a forthcoming Radio 4 documentary called Meeting The Man I Killed.  Sport Liverpool burnished their European legend with a thumping 3-0 win over Manchester City in their Champions League quarter-final first leg tie at Anfield. The visiting players refused to blame an attack on their team bus before the match for their poor performance. If you hadnt heard, Tiger Woods starts his first US Masters for three years later today with his opponents still fearing the intimidation factor of the four-time champion. Business Asian shares bounced back today after the trump administration hinted at flexibility in its trade dealings with China, helping Wall Street to shrug off concerns about a possible trade war. Imbued with the same animal spirits, the FTSE100 is set to rise 1.5% at the opening today. The pound is down a touch at $1.407 and 1.146. The papers     Guardian front page, Thursday 5 April 2018 Photograph: The Guardian    Many of the papers lead with the story of a 78-year-old Londoner who has been arrested after stabbing a suspected burglar to death in his kitchen. The Mirror splashes with Fury as OAP held for killing burglar, the Telegraph says Pensioner arrested over death of burglar and the Mail goes for the more emotive Held for murder ... defending his wife and home. The Express and Metro also lead with the same story. The Guardian leads with Gender pay gap: men paid more at 80% of firms while the Times says that British spies have pinpointed the Russian lab behind the Skripal attack, headlining their splash story: UK locates source of Salisbury nerve agent. The FT leads with Beijings fighting talk over US trade war sends markets reeling.  For more news: www.theguardian.com Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here."
"101""A group of female MPs have joined forces to encourage women to hold their employers to account and demand action over the gender pay gap, as the deadline for reporting nears. 
Led by Labour MP for Walthamstow, Stella Creasy, MPs will on Monday launch an online campaign called #PayMeToo, which aims to give working women advice on how to tackle the gender pay where they work.  
Across the UK a whiff of revolution is in the air. As companies report their gender pay gap and the disparity between male and female pay is revealed, disgruntled employees are asking what they can do to force their firms to take action. 
 
  
  
   
    What is being published?
    
    All companies and some public sector bodies in Great Britain, except Northern Ireland, with more than 250 employees had to&nbsp;report their gender pay gap to the Government Equalities Office for the first time by by 4 April 2018. The second year of gender pay gap reports&nbsp; - and the first indicator of how public bodies and companies are performing - must be filed by April 2019
    
    What is the gender pay gap?
    
    The gender pay gap is the difference between the average hourly earnings of men and women. The figure is expressed as a proportion of mens earnings. According to the ONS, the gap between what UK male and female workers earn  based on median hourly earnings for all workers&nbsp; -was 17.9% in April 2018, down from 18.4% in April 2017.
    
    Whats the difference between the mean and the median figures?
    
    Commonly known as the average, the mean is calculated by adding up the wages of all employees and dividing that figure by the number of employees. The mean gender pay gap is the difference between mean male pay and mean female pay.
    The median gap is the difference between the employee in the middle of the range of male wages and the employee in the middle of the range of female wages. Typically the median is the more representative figure, because the mean can be skewed by a handful of highly paid employees.
    
   
  
  
 
All private companies with more than 250 employees must by law reveal the difference in hourly rate paid to men and women before midnight on Wednesday 4 April. As the public sector deadline approached on Friday, it was revealed that nine out of ten public sector employers pay men more than women, with women paid on average 14% less than male colleagues. 
The social media campaign aiming to keep pressure up on employers will launch alongside a #PayMeToo website on Monday. It aims to ensure that women know they have the right to address pay issues at work, as well offering advice for what to do next, including working with trade unions and women networks. 
The campaign is backed by Creasys fellow Labour MPs Jess Phillips and Lucy Powell; Conservative MP Nicky Morgan; Liberal Democrats Jo Swinson, Christine Jardine and Layla Moran; as well as the Scottish National Partys Hannah Bardell and Plaid Cymrus Liz Saville Roberts. 
If we are serious about tackling the gender pay gap then we have to do more than publish data  we have to show were watching what happens next, said Creasy. 
The MPs are also asking women to complete and share the #PayMeToo survey, which they say will help inform our debates on parliament about how to address these issues. 
The survey was a simple way for women to reveal issues in their workplaces in confidence, added Creasy, who said that in her first job after university she discovered she was being paid less than a male colleague of the same age and experience. 
 
  
  
   
    
    Has your company published a gender pay gap audit? Has it explained the results well to staff? Is there a plan in place to deal with any issues?
    You can share your views on the situation at your company via our encrypted form here. We'll feature a selection of your responses in our reporting.
    
   
  
  
 
Women are already telling us that they are being told not to ask difficult questions about this for fear of affecting their careers and we want to be clear that trying to silence employees isnt the right response, she said. Every women has her own story of experiencing pay discrimination in their careers including me  now they need to know they have MPs ready to listen to them and act. 
Creasy added that instead of trying to shut down criticism, senior managers should actively seek solutions to tackle the gender pay gap. If you have a gender pay gap you should expect to be challenged to address it and held to account if you try to stop your staff speaking up, whether by trade unions, women networks or parliament, she said.  
Swinson urged employees to use the governments gender pay gap website  where every company that has filed results can be searched by name. This year has revealed a lot but in subsequent years it will become increasingly difficult to hide, she said. Warm words used by employers about how they are going to tackle the gender pay gap will be noted by workers and measured against the reality. 
Company information already filed on the Government Equalities Office portal  which requires companies to state their mean and median gender pay gap, bonus pay gap and percentage of men and women in each quartile of their business  has already revealed glaring pay gaps in many sectors.  
 
  
  
  A screengrab from the #PayMeToo website, which offers practical advice on addressing the gender pay gap. 
  
 
In banking and finance, bonus gaps of more than 60% were not uncommon; academy school chains were shown to have some of the worst gender pay gaps in the UK; while in female-dominated workforces in retail, gender pay gaps were as high as 50%.  
The #PayMeToo campaign encourages women to ask colleagues what they earn, and ask managers to share the companys action plan for dealing with the gender pay gap. It also suggests joining a union and urging union reps to take up the issue, adding: Take it to your women Network if you have one. If you dont, start one. 
Tulip Siddiq, MP for Hampstead and Kilburn, said she discovered she was paid 10,000 less than a male counterpart and had been given a raise after gathering the courage to ask for the same money. Once I asked, it wasnt difficult to get pay equality, she said. There are thousands of women in this situation and its a devastating inequality in our country. Its gone on for too long now and this is a real opportunity to sort it out. 
Nicky Morgan, MP for Loughborough and chair of the Treasury Select Committee, pointed to recent research from PwC that suggested closing the gender pay gap could boost female earning by 90bn. Getting the figures published is just the start  now is the time to start challenging employers to take action to eliminate the gap, she said. 
Lib Dem MP for Oxford West and Abingdon, Layla Moran, said: Information is empowering and that is exactly the point of this website. Women should not only look up their current or potential employers but use the data to demand action. "
"102""One of the potential benefits of gender pay gap reporting is that it can inform and improve the standard of debate about equality in the workplace. This is something we would all support. Unfortunately, your interactive tool allowing readers to calculate when does your company stop paying women in 2018? is a big step backwards. It would only make sense to claim that women are effectively working for free if the gender pay gap data are evidence of unequal pay for comparable jobs of equal value. However, as your own coverage makes clear, this is not necessarily the case. Pay gaps reflect a myriad of other factors, including occupation, seniority and&#xa0;hours worked. Your tool does not allow readers&#xa0;to calculate when men start&#xa0;working for free at the small&#xa0;but not insignificant number&#xa0;of companies where there is a gender pay gap in favour of women. Thats a shame, because understanding whats happening at these companies would also help&#xa0;the debate. But perhaps this would not fit the narrative.Julian JessopChief economist, Institute of Economic Affairs  As a former founding member of the women Equality party (and whose contribution to policy called loudly but in vain for the recognition&#xa0;of the unwaged care work of women), I read the headline of Sandi Toksvigs article (The gender pay gap isnt the half of it: our&#xa0;economy runs on women unpaid work, 9 April) with optimism. It&#xa0;certainly suggested that the WEPs lens on this is shifting. However, the article fails to go beyond lip service while continuing to cheer a model of equality based on the very economic system that exploits us: one of equality in a world that takes public and paid work under patriarchal norms as the default. Widening wealth inequality is only going to get worse without fundamental change to how we measure that which is valuable. It is not enough to state that our economy runs on women unwaged work without any hint of how to do better. We need a transformed economic model that recognises and remunerates caring work as central to human need. One that takes into account the attachment needs of the most vulnerable and marginalised under current thinking about childcare: babies and young children. We need creative ways to ensure that women are not penalised for having children and  if and when we choose  taking time out of the workforce to care for them. We need&#xa0;a transformed economic model&#xa0;that embraces those returning to the workforce as having something to offer. What is needed now is women liberation as&#xa0;opposed to mere equality.Vanessa OlorenshawAuthor, Liberating Motherhood: Birthing the Purplestockings Movement, Sevenoaks, Kent  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"103""One in 10 employers that should have reported on their gender pay gap have yet to do so, a fortnight after the cutoff date for the first such pay audit. Although more companies have reported since 4 April, the official closing date by when employers with more than 250 employees had to submit their data, 1,500 are still outstanding. The figures showed eight out of 10 employers pay men more than women. The Equalities and Human Rights Commission is responsible for enforcing the law. But in the Commons, opposition MPs challenged the government over cuts to the EHRCs funding and questioned its capacity to enforce the law. Dawn Butler, the shadow equalities minister, called on ministers to review the cuts. Setting out five further actions that should follow mandatory audits, she wanted certification of compulsory action plans to close the gap and monitoring of their implementation. She also called for the burden of proof of equal pay to fall on employers rather than employees having to prove unequal pay.  The EHRC needs more resources  70% of cuts will jeopardise their ability to enforce sanctions. The government needs to review the cuts they have currently levied, she said. Harriet Harman said the audit  introduced under the last Labour government but brought into force only two years ago  had laid bare what women always knew but could not prove, that men were paid more across every sector. In particular in the retail section which would not exist without women work. Why on earth at Tesco should women on the checkout earn 8 while men in the stores earn up to 11.50 an hour? she said. Harman, a Labour MP who has campaigned for gender equality since she became an MP in 1982, added: And it pains me to say, this but the unions need to get their house in order. How can women in Unite trust their union to champion equal pay if theres a 30% pay gap itself in the union. The Lib Dem MP Jo Swinson told MPs that as a coalition minister she had to fight with Downing Street to get the act, which was introduced under Labour but brought into force by the coalition, into force. The visibility and transparency of hard numbers helps to pierce the bubble of complacency in boardrooms and newsrooms and in our living rooms. But she added that the pay gap was only the start of a much more complex story and she questioned whether the government had a plan to tackle job segregation, or the dis-benefit of motherhood.  The governments lack of appetite for concrete action is palpable, she said afterwards. They drafted the regulations to exclude the sanction of fines for non-compliance and no action plans were required from employers. She also highlighted the failure of the government to act on the thousands of employers who force pregnant women out of their jobs."
"104""Issuing gender-neutral passports would not require any change in UK law and the documents would be recognised internationally, the high court has been told. The Home Offices refusal to provide non-gendered X passports breached privacy and human rights and was unlawful, Kate Gallafent QC said.The legal challenge has been brought by Christie Elan-Cane, who identifies as non-gendered and applied for a passport as neither male nor female more than 20 years ago. The cost of issuing a third category of passport would be as little as 2m, the court was told. British border controls already recognise non-gender passports issued by other countries without any problem. The NHS, Gallafent said, accepted that gender identity was not limited to male or female. It defined gender dysphoria as a condition where a person experiences discomfort or distress because theres a mismatch between their biological sex and gender identity. Up to 1% of the UK population did not identify as either male or female in a 2012 survey carried out by the Equality and Human Rights Commission, the court was told. That equates to 600,000 people. Elan-Cane first applied for a gender-neutral passport in 1995 and became aware in 2005 that the International Civil Aviation Organization, which issues international standards for machine-readable passports, had three categories: male, female and X for unspecified gender. Five years later Elan-Cane wrote to the Home Office requesting an X UK passport, which was denied on the grounds that Britain did not issue them. A number of other countries have been issuing X passports for many years, in Australias case since 2003. They are also available in India, Canada, Malaysia and New Zealand among others. Before the hearing, Elan-Cane, whose partner, David Brogan, also attended, said: The government position is untenable as well as discriminatory. Theresa May has raised LGBT rights with Commonwealth leaders yet is still trying to suppress legitimate identity in this country. As a non-gendered person, the government sees me as a non-person. All Im looking for is to be treated equally. Human Rights Watch has intervened in the case to support Elan-Canes application. In written submissions, James Eadie QC, for the Home Office, said: [We] do not accept that issuing passports with an X marker could be done without regard to the implications of recognising non-binary status across the government.  The amendment to legislative policy would incur a huge administrative burden. There would be significant administrative and financial costs to HM Passport Office in allowing an X marker in passports  The number of people likely to be benefited is relatively modest. The hearing continues. Judgment is expected to be reserved."
"105""As a child, Sharon McIvor spent her days roaming her grandmothers First Nations community deep in British Columbia, learning to fish, harvest sap and pick berries, as the Nlakapamux Nation had done for millennia. When the time came to teach those skills to her grandchildren, however, more than a century of gender discrimination stood in her way.    Related: Whos defending Canadas national interest? First Nations facing down a pipeline | Martin Lukacs    For nearly 150 years, legislation stipulating who the Canadian government officially recognises as First Nations has discriminated against women, making it more difficult for them to hold status and pass it to their descendants. Were the only group in Canada that has got legislated discrimination still active, alive and well, said McIvor.  Early versions of the Indian Act  the 1876 colonial-era legislation that attempts to wrangle Canadas more than 600 First Nations bands into a bureaucratic category  defined First Nations as a male Indian, the wife of a male Indian or the child of a male Indian. Campaigners have long challenged this definition, managing to chip away at some of the inequality.  But today  in a country with a prime minister who proclaims himself a feminist and whose government has sought to usher in feminist foreign policy around the world  the law still continues to discriminate.  Campaigners say the repercussions of that discrimination range from the denial of services and rights to a crisis in which as many as 4,000 indigenous women in Canada have gone missing or been murdered.     Sharon McIvor at the United Nations in Geneva. Photograph: Shelagh Day    McIvor was not entitled to indigenous status because she had married a non-indigenous man. A 1985 change to the act eventually allowed her and her children to gain status  but prevented her from passing it to her grandchildren.  Without status, McIvor wasnt able to live on reserve land and was excluded from hunting, gathering and fishing as well as traditional marriage, funeral and healing ceremonies. In contrast, her brother  twice married to non-indigenous women  was able to pass his status to his children and grandchildren. What I lost was my community, and what I lost was my ability to feel like I belonged, said McIvor.  She and her descendants also had no claims to the tax breaks, healthcare and education benefits accessed by some First Nations. She began what a decades-long fight for equality, using her training as a lawyer to pursue the issue in court. Her case joined a string of others that in recent years have sought to tackle the sex discrimination in the legislation. Last year, it finally seemed that equality was imminent, after Canadas senate unanimously passed a legislative amendment. After initially balking at the idea, the federal government  led by the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau  eventually approved the provisions.  But no timeline has been set for thee changes, and the government now says that it must first consult with First Nations and other indigenous groups. Theres no way that anybody in the world should be consulting with somebody on whether or not they should continue to discriminate, said McIvor.      Sharon McIvor, Jeannette Corbiere Lavel, Sandra Lovelace-Nicholas and Lynn Gehl, who led the struggle to end the discrimination. Photograph: Shelagh Day    Campaigners acknowledge that there are legitimate concerns over issues such as access to resources for the countrys 1.6 million indigenous peoples, but they express concerns that the consultations are being used to further delay equality. What were getting is words  nice words  but no action, said Shelagh Day of the Canadian Feminist Alliance for International Action. How could this still be happening with a government that is committed to women equality and that has said its interested in a new nation-to-nation relationship? Previous comments from the government hint at concerns over the costs involved. A recent report from the countrys parliamentary budget officer estimated that around 260,000 people would actually register if equality was granted  which could cost the government more than C$400m a year in health and education benefits. Several United Nations bodies have drawn a direct line between sexual discrimination in the Indian Act and Canadas crisis of missing and murdered indigenous women.  In a 2015 report, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights cited the Indian Act as an important factor in understanding the persistence of unequal treatment and stereotyping of indigenous women, which in turn continue to place indigenous women at an increased risk for multiple forms of violence.   Related: Unsolved murders of indigenous women reflect Canada's history of silence    The push for change comes amid a wider conversation on replacing the Indian Act with the indigenous self-government and self-determination. But as long as the act endures, it must treat men and women equally, said Day.  When the federal government is talking about forging a new nation-to-nation relationship with indigenous peoples, it seems critical that the pool of people with whom the new relationship is being forged not be distorted by colonial-era sex discrimination.  In an email to the Guardian, the federal ministry responsible for the Indian Act said officials are working with First Nations communities and other partners to design consultations on eliminating the remaining sex-based discrimination in the act. The ministry declined to detail their timeline.  After more than two decades of litigation, McIvors grandchildren are now entitled to status but  unlike her brothers grandchildren  will not be able to pass this to successive generations. So her battle for equality continues.  What I lost was a big piece of me, of who I am and how I was recognised. My people saw me as not one of them, she said.  People say its about getting your medical and your dental and your education. It has very little to do with that, she said. Its the recognition that I belong to this group of people. That they recognise me as belonging  and I recognise them. That was lost. "
"106""  6.03pm BST    Evening summary    Companies with more than 250 employees have until midnight tonight to reveal the gap between the average hourly rate paid to male and female employees. A slew of companies reported in the last few days, some with massive pay gaps, but more than 1,200 companies reported just in the past day.  On the government gender pay gap website you can see the difference between men and women hourly rate, the bonus gap and how many men and women make up the workforce in the lowest, middle and top earning jobs. They include:  A 41% gender pay gap across Macquaries UK employees. Two of its subsidiaries fare worse: Macquarie Corporate Holdings has reported a 60% median hourly gap while Macquarie Bank is also in at 53%. Karen Millen reported paying men 49% more on a median basis meaning that, company-wide, mens median pay is double that of women. Women make up 84% of the companys top positions and the same proportion of men and women receive bonuses yet women median bonus pay is 96% lower than mens. Benefit Cosmetics has a 30.7% gap although women make up more than 90% of every pay quartile. Others that popped up in the past 24 hours are construction giants John Sisk which has a 45% pay gap. Just 5% of the companys top quartile are female. Apple UK limited has reported a 24% pay gap (although the company says that, when all UK employees are taken together, the pay gap is 2% in women favour). Ryanair, not a stranger to making headlines, was revealed as having, by some distance, the worst gender pay gap in airline industry, having reported a 71.8% median hourly gap and male-dominated top quartile (it is 97% male). EasyJets figures dont make for easy reading either. The company has reported a 45.5% median gap with men making up 89% of employees in the highest quartile. The Conservative Party published its pay gap figures outside the governments gender gap portal (because the party does not meet the 250 baseline staff requirement that would otherwise have required it to file by midnight). The party said it has a 12.7% gap in favour of women, and also reported a small bonus gap of 2.9% in favour of men. The Labour Party reported its gender pay gap last month, reporting a median hourly gap of 4% with no bonus gap.        5.25pm BST       Philip Paget, partner and head of employment at Yorkshire law firm Gordons, said there was a great deal of misinformation about what a pay gap indicates.  It is vital to understand that the gender pay gap doesnt measure an employers compliance with equal pay for equal work legislation. An employer delivering equal pay may still have a large pay gap and an employer with no pay gap may be breaching the law. The figure is affected by a range of factors. In the health, education and retail sectors, which currently employ two-thirds of women over 50 in lower paid positions, the average hourly rate between male and female staff is likely to be significant simply due to the arithmetic of averages.  Where the reason for the gap is sex discrimination, then certainly this is a burning injustice as Prime Minister Theresa says. But to draw conclusions about unequal pay from GPG figures alone is very dangerous.  If you look at these statistics in isolation and without the more detailed explanations, which companies can and should put in, it could give an unfair and inaccurate picture.        5.16pm BST       Charlotte Gascoigne, director of research and consultancy at Timewise, the UKs first flexible jobs marketplace, said research has shown that there are four key reasons why the gender pay gap exists. She has written about the possible solutions. Reason 1: There are more men in senior roles than womenolution: Design senior roles to work for all Reason 2: Caring responsibilities and part-time roles are shared unequallySolution: Create quality flexible jobs that allow women and men to balance ambition with caring responsibilities Reason 3: Women choose to work in low-paid roles and sectorsSolution: Open up all sectors to part-time and flexible working Reason 4: Women are paid less than men for the same roleSolution: Stop paying women less than men for the same role    Updated at 5.18pm BST     4.20pm BST       The UK operations of Hollywood studios Sony, Warner Bros and Turner have reported large gender pay gaps. The median gender pay gap at Sony is 25.8%. This rises to 70.2% in terms of bonuses. We will pro-actively be looking into what steps we can take over the next year to achieve this, Sonys Head of HR for UK &amp; Ireland Andrew Beaumont told Deadline. Warner Bros. Entertainment UK reported a gender pay gap of 30.9%. This increases to 67.3% in terms of bonuses. The company said this reflected the greater number of men in senior management roles. We are determined to continue to address areas in our business where women are under-represented and to identify any barriers to progression, said Steve Mertz, Statutory Director of Warner Bros. Entertainment UK.  We will monitor the different stages of our employee life cycle, from recruitment through development, promotion and annual pay reviews, to help us identify relevant actions throughout the company to reduce our gender pay gap. Turner reported a gender pay gap of 28.6%. In terms of bonuses, this grows to 55.8%.     Updated at 4.20pm BST     4.04pm BST       Karen Gill, the co-founder of everywomen, an organisation that works to advance women in business, said the gender pay gap issue is critical as it highlights the lack of women working in higher paid roles and identifies to organisations where they need to focus their efforts and resources to ensure a balanced and more economically productive workforce. Gill said she anticipates female talent to shift higher up the business agenda following tonights deadline. We expect this to positively affect female talent as companies acknowledge the business benefit of having more women in senior positions and concentrate resources on the talent pipeline, she said.  If real change is to take place it believes all businesses must adopt the following three actions: 1. Maintain the new transparency which is obliging companies to accept and take seriously the scale of the gap. 2. Put in place action plans; policies are important, but without implementation and accountability they are meaningless. 3. Address learning and development requirements to reduce the skills gap as we know this grows engagement and helps women to aspire to more senior roles.        3.47pm BST       The midnight deadline for Britains largest companies to publish the median pay gap between female and male employees is only hours away. Last year the World Economic Forum found, globally, the gap widening across professions for the first time since it began collating data on gender and pay in 2006. Here Agence France-Presse presents a series of photos of women whose jobs have traditionally been done by men in their country.   Related: Women's work around the world - in pictures         3.45pm BST       Corinna, who works from home and lives in London, said: For me personally, my experience is that because Im quite strong-willed, I feel I havent suffered as much as some other women. The problem here is that you never really know what your counterparts are making. All you can do is use things like [jobs website] Glassdoor, and try to figure out what other people in your industry are making, and then try and go for more. In my industry there are no tranches of pay - its very hard to determine what you should be getting. When I actually worked for a firm, I tried to get as much as I possibly could. I was quite masculine ... Im a real feminist, but I was utilising masculine ways of speaking and asking for things. You have to adopt those sorts of things.Eloise Hall, 21, a student living in London, said: Quite a lot of it is kept under wraps unless you work there... Its happening all over the place, and it has for ages. Its significant, but in comparison to some problems, its less of a concern.  Its a large problem but its on a wider scale of inequalities. I actually think there are larger issues at the moment - everyone has the right to the same level of fairness and being treated equally. There are bigger issues, unfortunately - there are definitely wider problems that need to be covered.       3.45pm BST       My colleague Rupert Jones has been out on the streets of London asking people what they make of the gender pay gap. Lucy Barter, a freelance stage manager who lives in north London, said: Im a freelancer but I still suffer from it an awful lot. I work in theatre and events, and people on the same level as me... the women definitely get offered less money. Its annoying and frustrating. Im in my late 40s, and I dont think its got better in all the years Ive been working. On the media reporting of the gender pay gap, she said: Its certainly bringing it more to peoples attention, and that cant be a bad thing. The more things are out in the public eye, the more theres the pressure to make change. On whether it would affect which businesses she would give her custom to, she said: It would make a difference. If I saw there was a large gender gap [at a company], I might consider not using them, and using an alternative if I felt it was a fairer option. I have to say, in terms of Ryanair [which revealed a gender pay gap of 72%], I wouldnt choose to fly with them unless I had to.Karen, who works for a construction company and lives in London, said: Realistically, Ive never been too bothered about it - if Im willing to do a job [and accept] what Im offered, Ive never really thought outside that. But all this chat [about the gender pay gap] has definitely put it at the forefront of our minds.  I work for a construction company, and it appears ours is at the bottom - were one of the worst. I dont lose sleep over it, but its definitely worth addressing, and its also about trying to understand why. Childcare has got a lot to do with it. Ive got two kids - Im heading home now as weve got nursery issues... Even if men want to do it [childcare], I dont think its an accepted practice.    Updated at 3.45pm BST     3.16pm BST       Theresa May today said that Britains gender pay gap is a burning injustice that must be tackled. In an article for the Telegraph, the Prime Minister said the figures made for uncomfortable reading and compared todays battle for workplace equality to the struggle for universal suffrage a century ago. She wrote:  A hundred years ago, some women first won the right to vote. But for all the welcome progress in the decades since, major injustices still hold too many women back. When I became prime minister, I committed myself to tackling the burning injustices which mar our society. One such is the gender pay gap. The difference in the median hourly wages earned by men and women in Britain currently stands at 18%. This is a historic low, but progress in shrinking it remains far too slow. We need to act if we are to close the gap for good within a generation.        3.10pm BST    The airlines    Ryanair, not a stranger to making headlines, was revealed as having, by some distance, the worst gender pay gap in airline industry having reported a 71.8% median hourly gap and male-dominated top quartile (it is 97% male).  EasyJets figures dont make for easy reading either. The company has reported a 45.5% median gap with men making up 89% of employees in the highest quartile. FlyBe has a median gap of 41% (although sister company Flybe Aviation Services has a lower, 11.7% gap). British Airways, by comparison, has reported a gap of just 10%, a great outcome if you compare it to the others. But its worth keeping in mind that its subsidiaries havent fared quite as well. Overnight the company released figures for British Airways Holidays which shows a 27% pay gap and British Airways Maintenance Cardiff, which carries maintenance of long haul Boeing aircraft, reporting a 20%.  BA CityFlyer, which mainly flies scheduled passenger services at London City Airport with a staff of 502 filed a 42% gap. Conversely Gatwick Ground Services, which employs 281 people in ground handling and aircraft cleaning at Gatwick Airport has a 9% gap in favour of women.     Updated at 5.13pm BST     3.09pm BST    The 3 big political parties    The Conservative Party has published its pay gap figures outside the governments gender gap portal (because the party does not meet the 250 baseline staff requirement that would otherwise have required it to file by midnight). The party says it has a 12.7% gap in favour of women. The party also reported a small bonus gap of 2.9% in favour of men. The Labour Party reported its gender pay gap last month, reporting a median hourly gap of 4% with no bonus gap.  A spokeswomen for the Liberal Democrats said the party did not have to report on the basis that it employs fewer than 250 people but had done so voluntarily last year and would be doing so again in due course.        3.05pm BST       On a rainy lunchtime break in Glasgow, a couple of Santander workers admitted that they only had a vague awareness of gender pay gap discussions or any anger around it, and no sense of where their own employer stood.  Theres been no discussion of it in the office and no emails about it, one women said. Her friend, who works in complaints, added that she is more used to dealing with angry customers, but resolved to take a look at the companys rating online this evening. A women at the top of a company can make a huge difference to the way women employees are treated at all levels, said a Zurich Insurance worker, whose female boss Tulsi Naidu has been in place since 2016.  Ive seen all the news about the pay gap but I think my own firm is pretty equal. We know the different grades of job and its fairly transparent. Barclays gets a similarly positive report from a couple of staff members sheltering from the sleet. The pay gap has been discussed everywhere and that is long overdue, but in fact in the sector we work in, banking, is not so bad, one said. For as long as Ive can remember they have been flexible about women returning to work after having children and in comparison our pay differential is not that bad. Another said: There is definitely a lot of anger out there since the figures have been published. But I dont agree with men having their salaries dropped.  Women should be brought up to the same level. We also need to remember that in fields all salaries have been overinflated because of the market at that time, which also has to be taken into account. According to the government website, the gender pay gap at Santander UK PLC is 29.1%. At Santander UK Technology Limited its 9.7%. At Santander Consumer (UK) PLC its 22.1% and at Santander UK Operations Limited its 5.8%. At Zurich Employment Services Limited the median gender pay gap is 33.7% and at Zurich UK General Services Limited its 25.9%. The gender pay gap at Barclays Services Limited is 29.9%. At Barclays Bank PLC its 43.5% and at Barclays Bank UK PLC its 14.2%.       2.40pm BST       Employees at RBS in central Manchester leaving the office for lunch this afternoon did not seem preoccupied by the gender pay gap announcements.  I heard that Ryanair is the worst, said one man. Ive read reports about that, but I think generally, in the banking industry, its OK. I dont think its an issue. It doesnt need to be highlighted. I think everyone is treated equally.RBSs median gender pay gap is 36.5%, the lowest of the UK big four banking groups, but significantly higher than the national average of 18.4%.  I think [the gender pay gap] is important, but the way that its being reported at the moment doesnt help, said another man, who did not want to be named. What is important is that it drives the right improvements. Its good that companies are doing the work to understand the gaps and the reasons for them and that they have action plans. Laurie Connolly, who has only been working at RBS a few weeks, said she doesnt know what the companys gender pay gap is and that she is unsure of what to make of all the recently published figures. Its not clear how much women taking breaks in their careers to have children would impact on it, she said. Id hate to think that it is due to some inherent gender bias by employers, but, of course, thats the worry. I sometimes do look around at my colleagues and think, are men being promoted more than me?, but thats probably just a selfish paranoia. Connolly used to work for the Coop and says there was a lot of motivation there to tackle gender inequalities within the work force. Asked if she thinks she has ever been paid less because she is a women, she said: Probably not, but who knows? Sheltering from the rain by the RBS building in Manchesters Spinningfields, HR recruiter Nathan Dobosz said: I think theres a general confusion about the gender pay gap and equal pay, which are being lumped together I think its creating a lot of unnecessary negativity. I know lots of organisations where they arent necessarily doing their best in terms of the gender issue as a whole, but have reported pretty good [gender pay gap] results. And there are organisations that I know that have more of a way to go [on the pay gap], but have more in place to support women within the work place.       2.31pm BST       Thanks for all your comments and contributions today. Im handing over the gender pay gap liveblog to my colleague Nadia Khomami.  Well be scraping the data again this afternoon to find out who really is filing the gender pay gap report at the very last minute, and hearing from reporters on the ground about the publics reaction to the figures.  If youd like to contact me on anything gender pay gap related please do get in touch. Im on alexandra.topping@theguardian.com and @lexytopping.        2.23pm BST    Multi-academy trusts report card: could do better?    As previously flagged schools - particularly multi-academy trusts and some of the countrys best-known public schools - have not covered themselves in glory during the gender gap reporting process. As of 8.30am this morning just under half (49) of the 100 companies and organisations with a gender pay gap were schools or academy trusts, all of them with median hourly pay gaps of more than 50% meaning, company-wide, mens median pay is double that of female staff. The worst offender among the independent schools is the Royal Hospital School in Ipswich, which reported a median pay gap of 66% while, among the academy trust groups, the worst three are Sussex Learning Trust, the Holy Family Catholic Multi Academy Trust and Schoolsworks Academy Trust which have all filed gaps of at least 61%.        1.39pm BST    Stella Creasy on #PayMeToo     Women. Like men, only cheaper. And in 2018 we are discovering by just how much. The introduction of mandatory reporting has transformed the debate about the gender pay gap from a little-discussed dry set of statistics directly into staffrooms and workplaces across Britain, with explosive effect. The data shows in black and white just how few women are progressing within organisations across every area of the economy  whether in the public or private sector, gender still too often predicts pay.    Related: Weve set up #PayMeToo to ensure women earn what they deserve | Stella Creasy         1.28pm BST    Find out which day of the year women in your company start to work &quot;for free&quot;    Now, if this isnt the best data-driven interactive around the gender pay gap I will eat my notepad:   Related: When will your company stop paying women in 2018?    Please do note that figures do not compare equal pay for equal work or roles, as companies have not been legally required to release this information. We also know that women arent actually working for free, but as we mention in the piece there is a long history of campaigners using dates to highlight the gender pay gap and this interactive feeds into that.        1.09pm BST       Interesting comment from Apeiron below:  I am not sure why people are saying the Pay Gap is a useless indicator. It is important because it highlights the lack of women in senior positions. For example, see the Bank of England below. Men and women are paid equally for doing the same job but the pay gap is 24%. Mr Carney and all four deputy governors are men, as are the vast majority of senior BoE officials. There is only one women on the nine-strong MPC, and there are none on the Financial Policy Committee, which comprises 11 members. Of the 67 most senior roles in the central bank, just eight are held by women.        1.01pm BST    Insider's account of gender pay gap reporting    Interesting email from David Hopkins, a Reward Development Manager at a major UK employer (which hes asked me not to name). Hes been deeply involved in the process and sent some reflections: On waiting until the last minute:  My view is that that was a mistake on their part. We chose to publish some time before the due date, which allowed us to develop conversations about how best to address the gender pay gap, rather than the focus being on comparisons with our competitors  The data  Id agree to some extent that the raw figures are not necessarily the be all and end all. Thats why we chose to focus on the opportunity the figures offered to engage staff in discussions around the reasons for pay differences and how best to address them, rather than on how they compared to other companies.   The process  Finally, the process of collating and publishing the figures, while time consuming, has proved to be very beneficial and an ideal opportunity to engage with staff on diversity and inclusion topics. The key for us was to engage wholeheartedly with the spirit of the regulations, not treat them as a burden.     Updated at 1.20pm BST     12.32pm BST    The equality gap    Some readers suggesting that as well as reporting on their gender pay gap companies should also have to report the difference between pay at the top and the bottom of companies. Wanda Wyporska of the Equality Trust got in touch to flag up their Pay Tracker, which ranks, among other things, the FTSE 100 in terms of CEO to average worker pay/minimum wage. She says:   Our new project will look at the FTSE 100, sector by sector in terms of GPG, CEO pay ratios (hopefully the next piece of pay disclosure legislation to come in soon), Living Wage, unionisation, etc. Our aim is to publicise these issues, so that employees and potential employees and consumers can use the findings to support better businesses and unions can use the data in pay negotiations.         12.25pm BST    Guardian readers react to the gender pay gap    Guardian readers have been in touch to share their thoughts on their companys gender pay gap reporting.L who works at VF Corporation, an apparel company that works with brands like Vans and Timberland, was surprised about their gap which reported the mean figure as 21.6% and 7.3% for the median: We are mostly women in the department where I work, so I was really disappointed when I saw it. Whats missing is an action plan. We got an internal email which says something vague about actions being taken, but externally there is no action. Even if we know that some of our brands are really focused its no excuse. Today The North Face announced a campaign for more women in their adverts.Commenter TabithaJean thinks the split between the top and the bottom of a company is key to understanding the figures: We are pretty standard as men make up the majority of the high paid senior positions. I am classed as unskilled in our jobs hierarchy, yet I have a ton of skills not demonstrated by those above, including getting up off my arse to find out how new systems work. Its just that these skills are not quantifiable with a qualification. Everyones contribution needs to be reassessed without the lens of making profit to see better what the value would be to the company.There is a willingness to aid women to get into higher paid roles, but I think this ignores the key fact that women are in the lower paid and lower regarded support roles. We need to examine why we dont value this contribution to the company more, because the whole thing would grind to a halt without us.For commenter LouisConn there is light at the end of the tunnel: Our gender pay gap (university) was published a few weeks ago and looks like the standard gap for the sector. Almost all high faculty positions are occupiedby men, however, as more and more departmental office holders are now women in five to 10 years things might look different. You can share your views and experiences with us by filling in the form here or by contacting the Guardian via WhatsApp by adding the contact +44(0)7867825056.    Updated at 12.32pm BST     12.16pm BST    Last minute reports    Companies have had a full year to report their gender pay gap yet thousands have chosen to leave it to the last minute.  More than 1,200 companies reported in the past 24 hours. Given that they are now coming in thick and fast we thought we would highlight a few of these eleventh hour filings. Although Macquarie says its gender pay gap across its UK employees is 41%, two of its subsidiaries fare worse: Macquarie Corporate Holdings has reported a 60% median hourly gap while Macquarie Bank is also in at 53%.  Karen Millen reported paying men 49% more on a median basis meaning that, company-wide, mens median pay is double that of women. Women make up 84% of the companys top positions and the same proportion of men and women receive bonuses yet women median bonus pay is 96% lower than mens. Other names from the High Street include Victorias Secret at 19% and French Connection which fares well with just a 1.6% gap. Benefit Cosmetics has a 30.7% gap although women make up more than 90% of every pay quartile. Others that popped up in the past 24 hours are construction giants John Sisk which has a 45% pay gap. Just 5% of the companys top quartile are female. Apple UK limited has reported a 24% pay gap (although the company says that, when all UK employees are taken together, the pay gap is 2% in women favour).  Dyson has reported on behalf of two subsidiaries Dyson Technology which has a 17% gap and Dyson Limited at 10%. Columbia Pictures and Warner Bros Entertainment are also in reporting gaps of 15% and 23% respectively (Warner Bros Studios Leavesden has a 14.4% gap). Others in the mix are Space NK with a 42% median gap and the Universities Superannuation Scheme (35%).     Updated at 12.17pm BST     12.12pm BST    Amber Rudd: I am proud the UK is leading the way on this issue    Amber Rudd, home secretary and minister for women and equalities, has posed a video saying she is proud the UK is leading the way in requiring companies to report their gender pay gap.     Tonight is the deadline for businesses in the private sector to report their #genderpaygap. Reporting #genderpaygap data is the first step on the road to creating fairer and more equal workplaces across the UK. pic.twitter.com/HXDaRkFw85&mdash; Amber Rudd MP (@AmberRuddHR) April 4, 2018         11.50am BST    Quality of the data    Some questions have been asked about the quality of the data that is being gathering by the gender pay gap reporting requirement.  Chris Rowley, professor at Kellogg College, Oxford, says despite its clear shortcomings, the data is useful and will improve year-on-year as more data is added. Rather than expecting the first year to achieve absolute purity of data, the collection is a valuable process in its own right, he argues.   It will drive transparency and accountability and prompt thought, action and improvement by exposing previously hidden company pay systems.  Rowley says that organisational and structural business problems are underpinned by deeper cultural issues.   Even with greater emphasis given to work-family balance tension remains between offering family-friendly policies, including part-time working, as it is often penalized with stunted pay and career progression.  To address this he says companies need to normalise non full-time work for all employees, not just women, change the perception of jobs traditionally being done by women as being less valued and value non-linear career paths. However Rowley is less optimistic that this can be done without legislation.   Given the history of over four decades of equal pay laws, and that the earlier 2010 measure to encourage companies to voluntarily report gender pay data failed, change is unlikely to happen without rigorous, systematic and strong state intervention, statutory underpinning and effective enforcement mechanisms.     Updated at 12.12pm BST     11.22am BST    Gender Pay Gap in Worcestershire revealed!    Massive props to Malvern Local who are doing exactly what all local news papers should be doing. Drilling down into the data, and seeing what it means for their area and their readers.     REVEALED: Gender pay gap in Worcestershire Malvern Local (@malvernlocal) April 4, 2018         11.21am BST    Who has to report?    As of 11.03am 9064 employers have filed their gender pay gap report. Weve asked the government - repeatedly - how many are expected to file, and - repeatedly - they have trotted out the phrase the deadline hasnt passed yet. So maybe well find out at some point past tomorrow.  A well-placed source has said there is around 2,000 public sector employers. The deadline for public sector employers to file the gender pay gap reports was Friday. A search under public sector on the government portal shows that 1643 have fulfilled the requirement.  Which *potentially* means were missing around 2000 companies, if the 9,000 private company estimate the government has used previously is accurate.  The Financial Times have suggested that the number of companies covered by the legislation could, in fact, be closer to 13,500 - as employers have to report by business unit, meaning that some have reported several different numbers.        10.34am BST    Companies scramble to file at the last minute    As expected, there has been a big rush to file gender pay gap reports just before the deadline. More than 1,200 companies have reported in the past 24 hours.  More companies (1245) published their figures with less than 24 hours to go than did in the first 326 days of the service running.     gender pay gap: more companies (1245) published their figures today -- one day before the legal deadline -- than did in the first 326 days of the service running&mdash; Niko Kommenda (@niko_tinius) April 3, 2018      Updated at 10.36am BST     10.20am BST    What lies behind the gender pay gap?    Feminist writer Caroline Criado Perez has used Twitter to challenge critics who argue that there is no such thing as a gender pay gap.     People arguing that the gender pay gap doesnt exist are talking utter shite. Thread.&mdash; Caroline Criado Perez (@CCriadoPerez) April 3, 2018    Heres an edited version of that thread - its worth reading in full.   To get one thing out of the way, yes its true that the entire pay gap cannot be explained by straight discrimination of the paying a women less than a man for the exact same job variety. That doesnt mean none of it can. For example, around the world, women consistently work for longer than men on a daily basis. We dont realise this because we dont see women work. And we dont pay them for it. But just because we dont pay women for their cleaning, cooking, taking care of children, of elderly parents - of husbands, who create 7 extra hours of housework for their wives every week that doesnt mean it isnt essential. Or that it isnt work. So weve established that women work and this work is vital. It has to get done one way or another. It could be shared equally but it isnt. Women do 75% of the worlds unpaid carework.  And this is where governments come in. women unpaid work has been estimated to amount to $10 trillion a year. Thats roughly 13% of GDP. [But] governments dont systemically collect data on women unpaid work and they still use a form of calculating GDP that was dreamt up to support a post war economy and which excluded unpaid care because it seemed too difficult.  The upshot of all this is that when governments make cuts they see women unpaid labour, as the @womenBudgetGrp puts it, as a costless resource to exploit And in the short term it is costless - for governments. Not so for women, who are forced, variously, into part time jobs and jobs below their skill level because so few senior jobs offer flexibility. Governments do pay in the long term though. 25% of the growth in the US economy between 1970-2009, seen as a golden age of growth was down to an increase in the female labour force. Thats a huge figure. Growth has slowed in recent years and governments are desperate to boost it. Increasing female labour force participation is an obvious way: if women were able to engage in the paid labour force at the same rate as men, global GDP would grow by an estimated $12 trillion. A quick note on gendered job segregation. There is evidence from multiple countries and in multiple fields that wages *go down* when a profession becomes feminised and wages *go up* when men enter into it. If that isnt a clear sign of a real pay gap I dont know what is. One more thing. Research from the US has also shown that the hourly wage for those working 50hrs+ has risen twice as fats as those working a more typical 35-49 hrs per week. Great for hard workers! you may think. Only...theres all that unpaid carework to get done and men arent gonna do it so guess who *cant* work insane hours? Arguments that the gender pay gap data being published at the moment is irrelevant to all this are being wilfully blind, stupid, or both. Data is never a bad thing - and we have far too little of it when it comes to women. We need to be able to quantify how much of an impact the various ways in which women are discriminated against in the workplace (both directly and through structural bias) are having - on women individual pockets, and the economy overall.         9.10am BST    What does the data tell us?    Well be analysing the figures as they roll in throughout the day and revisiting some interesting companies. There was a flurry of reports over the bank holiday weekend and as the average pay gap has increased week-on-week, its clear some companies have tried to bury their filings in the last minute rush. However weve been keeping tabs on the filings each day over a series of months and will be discussing some of the most interesting submissions as the deadline draws closer. All the figures are reported based on the median hourly pay gap, which is the difference between what the median male employee is paid and the median female employee is paid, expressed as a proportion of male earnings.   What is the difference between mean and median?   While the figures are exciting, theyre also far from perfect. The numbers released under legislation dont compare the gap based on similar roles and dont identify which roles are part-time  However the numbers are the first insight into inequality in the workforce on a company-level anywhere in the world. While they dont reveal issues of equal pay for equal work, they have ignited a debate about pay and equality in the workplace.       8.48am BST    Government warns companies: file by midnight    Amber Rudd - minister for women as well as home secretary - has warned companies they have no excuse for filing the gender pay gap results late.  Not sure she mentioned it to her own party, however. The Conservative party has already said that it wont be filing its figures until tomorrow. To be fair, on the snapshot day last April 5 they employed fewer than 250 people, so technically dont have to file anything. but still, it is Quite Funny.  The Labour party filed its gender pay gap earlier this month, revealing that female employees earned 4% less than their male counterparts. This compares with the national median average of 18.4%. The Liberal Democrats have a smaller workforce than either of the two main parties and are not expected to publish their results.    Related: Final warning issued to firms to report gender pay gap by midnight         7.53am BST       Welcome to the Guardians gender pay gap live blog. Companies with more than 250 employees have until midnight tonight to reveal the gap between the average hourly rate paid to male and female employees.  Weve already seen a slew of companies reporting in the last few days, some with massive pay gaps, but all eyes will be on the final stragglers as they attempt to make it over the line.  On the government gender pay gap reporting you can see the difference between men and women hourly rate, the bonus gap and how many men and women make up the workforce in the lowest, middle and top earning jobs. Well be picking out trends and highlighting the best and worst gender pay gaps in companies across the UK.  The gender pay gap isnt about equal pay for equal work, but it does reveal the average gap between all wages at a company and shows that in many the upper echelons are still dominated by men. That has thrown up serious questions about the reasons behind the gender pay gap and what can be done to address it.  We would love you to join in the conversation. What is the gender pay gap in your company, and what- if anything- are they going to do about it?  You can contribute via our callout, commenting below the line, by emailing me on alexandra.topping@theguardian.com or by tweeting me @lexytopping     Updated at 10.41am BST  "
"107""A senior Church of England bishop has said some LGBT people have been driven to harm or even to kill themselves as a result of pain and rejection caused by the church. Paul Bayes, the bishop of Liverpool, also likened the struggle to persuade the Church of England to be truly welcoming and inclusive to LGBT people to the fight against slavery. Speaking at the launch of the Ozanne Foundation, a Christian charity aimed at eliminating discrimination based on sexuality or gender, Bayes said the C of E was clear in its public statements opposing homophobia and that it welcomed all people. Yet at the same time we know that many LGBTI+ people have suffered pain and rejection from Christians, personally and institutionally, to the extent that many have left the churches or in some cases have felt compelled to self-harm or even to take their own lives. And this goes on today. We need to do better. The church needed to love people as God made them, he said. That will have implications for our policies and stances as churches. If we are to do better, we need to change. There had been other times in the history of communities of faith when people have found it difficult to accept change, and sometimes difficult to see Gods hand in it, Bayes said. A classic example is the struggle for the abolition of slavery, and the ceaseless advocacy that was needed on the part of Christians to persuade their friends that Gods love for all human beings had social consequences which demanded justice. The Ozanne Foundation, which Bayes is chairing, would advocate courteously but consistently and without apology for change in C of E policy and culture, he said. Its work which demands patience, but which also calls for a holy impatience  While we are talking, people are suffering. Bayes is the most senior member of the C of E hierarchy to press publicly for far-reaching change in the churchs attitudes to LGBT people and a meaningful welcome to Christians in same-sex relationships. As a senior bishop associated with the churchs evangelical wing, he has previously acknowledged that he has been profoundly changed by encounters with lesbian and gay Christians, including within his own family. The C of E is moving glacially slowly on changing its attitudes, he said. The church has been wrestling with attitudes to gay clergy and congregants in same-sex relationships for at least two decades, but campaigners for LGBT equality believe the current of opinion is in their favour. Although the church still formally adheres to traditional biblical teaching that marriage can only be a union between a man and a women, in practice many churches offer informal blessings to gay couples who have gone through civil wedding ceremonies. The Ozanne Foundation is named after Jayne Ozanne, a prominent campaigner for equality within the church. Its three-pronged strategy is to encounter, educate and empower, and it will work with organisations around the world to advocate for equality and diversity.  In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. "
"108""Britain has been accused of caving in to pressure from the governments of Commonwealth states which criminalise homosexuality after doubts emerged over a planned UK effort to promote gay rights at the blocs upcoming summit in London.   Related: The Commonwealth is working to undo the British empire's homophobic legacy    A guide on international best practice on sexual orientation and gender identity had been due to be published by the Government Equalities Office on 16 April, the opening day of the Commonwealth heads of government meeting (Chogm). The summit presents an opportunity to engage with Commonwealth member states and continue the UKs special responsibility to advance equality across the Commonwealth for people with minority sexual orientations and gender identities, according to details of a tender seeking a supplier for the guide. However, as the summit approaches, the government has been unable to confirm whether or not the guide would be published in time, saying only that it would come out in due course. The issue of LGBT rights remains a sensitive topic within the Commonwealth while some 37 of its 53 nations still outlaw homosexuality.  The Labour MP Chris Bryant expressed concern about whether the initiative would go ahead. It as if the government is now soft pedalling on the issue of LGBT rights. It might be the case now that they would prefer to publish this at a later date when no one will really notice, he said.   Related: Tom Daley speaks out on anti-gay laws in Commonwealth nations after winning gold    The bloc was described as a bastion of homophobia by the veteran human rights campaigner, Peter Tatchell, who said that the government appeared to have downgraded what was supposed to be a new report and gone back on a promise to publish on 16 April to coincide with the Commonwealth summit. This sends a very negative signal to the more than 100 million LGBT+ people who suffer criminalisation, discrimination and violence in 70% of Commonwealth countries, he said. It looks like Theresa May and Boris Johnson have caved in to pressure from homophobic member states to not highlight LGBT+ rights during the summit. Appeasing homophobes is despicable. During the summit, Tatchell and other campaigners are planning a picket of the Commonwealth secretariats headquarters at Marlborough in London on 19 April when they will be joined by LGBT delegates from various countries. Rights activists suspect that the government is eager not to offend other Commonwealth states as it seeks to use the first Chogm meeting since Britain voted to leave the EU to foster new trading relationships.  Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, has spoken of how the summit is a chance to redefine the trading relationship of the Commonwealth and re-invigorate Britains links with other member states as Brexit talks continue.   Related: Homosexuality illegal in 41 out of 53 Commonwealth countries  report    However, leaders at Commonwealth summits have tended to avoid significant discussions of LGBT rights. Nine of the member states that criminalise homosexuality have life imprisonment as the punishment while more are accused of failing to protect LGBT people against discrimination and hate crime. In February, the British overseas territory of Bermuda also became the first jurisdiction in the world to legalise and then repeal same-sex marriage, in what critics have called an unprecedented rollback of civil rights by the British territory.  Pressed by Bryant as to why the move had been approved by the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, the junior Foreign Office minister, Harriett Baldwin, said the government was obviously disappointed but felt it had no choice after legislation was decided by the islands elected government. The best practice guide, which the UK government has been seeking to develop, is envisaged as an aid for elected officials and policymakers in Commonwealth states, according to details of the tender document. It insisted that there has been progress on rights in some parts of the Commonwealth, listing the examples of Nauru, Seychelles and Mozambique decriminalising same-sex acts in recent years. But positive achievements go beyond decriminalisation of same-sex acts and a number of countries have laws protecting against discrimination in employment, allow organisations working on these issues to register, and/or have other inclusive policies. Celebrating and sharing these positive steps is vital in order to ensure this progress continues.  It added that there was currently a gap in the literature available when it comes to sharing up-to-date best practice examples of how Commonwealth member states are protecting and supporting citizens with a minority sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or sex characteristics. These included examples of how some states had reformed their penal code and developed policy to address bullying and hate crime related to sexuality and gender."
"109""Peking University, Chinas top academic institution, admitted this month that 20 years ago a professor had been involved in inappropriate student-teacher relations with a female student. Former classmates of that student, Gao Yan, a star pupil studying Chinese literature, say she was raped and that the assault pushed her to kill herself less than a year later.  The university said in a statement on 6 April that at the time they concluded the professor, Shen Yang, had handled the situation very imprudently and he was given an administrative warning and demerit in the summer of 1998, about four months after Gaos suicide. Shen has denied the allegations by Gaos classmates, calling them total nonsense.   For one student, that wasnt enough. Deng Yuhao, an undergraduate at Peking University studying maths, posted a statement on WeChat on 7 April calling for students and teachers to pressure the university to release more details of their investigation. His article was viewed or shared more than a million times.  That night a professor called Deng to meet, according to accounts circulated by students on WeChat. More than 10 students accompanied him, waiting outside while he spoke with the professor who told Deng he was being disrespectful of the dead and his actions could cause the situation to get out of hand.    Related: Anger as Chinese media claim harassment is just a western problem     The next day, Dengs online statement and all reports mentioning him were scrubbed from the internet. But the story had already spread, inspiring other students and activists. There are many different roles in this movement... The most important is the students. They have a strong motivation to do something, said Li Maizi, a Chinese activist working on gender equality, who was one of five women detained in 2015 for campaigning against sexual harassment. They are very united. The young people are powerful at this moment, she said.  From the outside, Chinas MeToo movement is a fledgling one. In January, when a former PhD student at Beijings Beihang University accused her ex-adviser of attempting to rape her 12 years ago, the phrases woyeshi, MeToo and anti-sexual harassment trended online briefly before they were censored. Rice bunny, a homonym for MeToo has also been censored.  A WeChat account called ATSH, which stands for anti-sexual harassment, that people like the Beihang university student had used to write about their experiences, has been blocked. A popular blog, Feminist Voices, has also been censored on Weibo. Petitions from students and teachers calling on universities to establish systems to counter sexual assault have so far gone unanswered. According to a 2017 survey of about 6,500 respondents, mostly women between the ages of 18 and 22, done by the Guangzhou Gender and Sexuality Education centre, almost 70% of respondents had experienced sexual harassment, with 40% of those cases occurring in public on campus. Sexual harassment in China is so common. People dont really take it seriously. They dont really deal with this issues, said Wei Tingting, who runs the gender education centre in Guangzhou. At universities that is compounded by a massive power imbalance between teachers and students. Still, Chinese students and activists are pushing for sexual harassment to be taken seriously.  Students at Nanjing University have started a Weibo account, Me too blue whale, a nickname students use for themselves. Other students have opened similar accounts. At Renmin University in Beijing, students are reportedly doing their own research on sexual harassment on campus. Zheng Xi, a student in Zhejiang province has been writing to transport authorities to put up signs on the subway that say No Harassment, with a picture of a man attempting to grope a female passenger. She said she has received positive replies from officials in Kunming, Shanghai, and the government-sanctioned women federation in Shenzhen. Zhu also hands out brochures about gender discrimination at job fairs. I can see progress in peoples understanding about countering sexual harassment, and I see more people caring about it and making an effort, she said. The consensus on counter sexual harassment is gradually forming. People are still mobilising online. Wei published an open letter to her alma mater, Wuhan University, asking it to establish a policy on sexual harassment. Through discussion groups on WeChat she and her colleagues are encouraging more people to do the same at other universities in the city. What impresses me most is the students enduring efforts to get their messages out. They dont give up after their articles are deleted, said a volunteer with the Feminist Voices blog who asked not to be named.   Related: China's women break silence on harassment as #MeToo becomes #WoYeShi     Male students and members of the LGBT community are also involved. The movement is becoming more and more decentralised, the Feminine Voices volunteer said. Still, students are coming under pressure. Like Deng, they are being called in for meetings or tea with school administrators. Tutors have asked their students to delete their online posts and discuss their concerns privately. In some cases parents are called. These universities are afraid these initiatives will have a bad effect on their name, said Zhang Leilei who has been working with students and teachers to pressure universities to establish policies to prevent sexual harassment. Almost all of our initiatives have been deleted [from the internet] once or twice, she said.  Still, their efforts are making some difference. The day after Dengs early morning meeting, Peking University said it would adopt a zero tolerance policy toward sexual harassment and establish channels for reporting cases. Shanghai Normal University and Nanjing University, Shens current employer, both terminated their contracts with him. More students have been emboldened. After Shens firing, another former student of his told Chinese media that he had groped her. That report was quickly censored. Las week, a student at Renmin University posted on the question and answer site, Zhihu, that one of the schools professor had sexually harassed her. The post was deleted, but not before it was copied and posted on Wechat. Now censored photos showed students standing outside the professors classroom in protest.  After a standoff between students and administrators, the university has promised to investigate.   Additional reporting by Wang Xueying  In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. "
"110""Fifty-eight years later, when Rogelio Goibur dug up the body in a remote part of eastern Paraguay this March, a few teeth were all that were left to identify it. Were fighting against time, he said. Paraguays soil is highly acidic, he explained. It eats bones very quickly, so the DNA disappears, and its much harder to obtain a genetic profile. Goibur, 62, heads Paraguays commission for historical memory and reparation. Since 2011, the underfunded body has documented some 450 desaparecidos, located and exhumed 37 bodies, named four, and returned them to living relatives where possible.  All were victims of the 1954-89 regime of Alfredo Stroessner, which jailed, raped, tortured and disappeared opponents under the auspices of a US-backed anti-communist crusade. For Goibur, the mission is personal. His father, Agustn Goibur, is still missing. All human beings have the right to mourn, to know where their loved one is, he said. And I include myself. But his search also carries new political resonance. On Sunday, Mario Abdo Bentez, 46  the son of Stroessners private secretary  is on course to be elected president.   Related: Trump of the tropics: the 'dangerous' candidate leading Brazil's presidential race    After Argentina, Brazil, Peru and Chile, Paraguay is the latest country in the region to pivot rightwards. It has less far to go than some.  The current president, Horacio Cartes  like Abdo Bentez a member of the Stroessners Colorado party  has placed former functionaries of the dictatorship in key ministries and called the generals birthday a happy date. But the rise of Marito  championed by the church and a rural Colorado base disgruntled with Cartess liberal economics  is a painful reminder of how little Paraguay has reckoned with its past. Abdo Bentez has called for the enforcement of obligatory military service  another Stroessner legacy  and promised to fill all public positions with Colorado faithful. Even though he was a kid at the time, he defends that era, said Guillermina Kanonikoff, a former leftwing guerrilla whose husband, Mario Schaerer, was tortured to death by the regime.  He doesnt have to carry the sin of his father, she added. But he never asked for forgiveness, or showed shame ... hes creating the platform for a dictatorship. According to Rosa Palau  custodian of the supreme courts Museum of Justice  Paraguays lingering culture of fear has stopped people coming forward with information about dictatorship-era crimes. While Stroessner left, she added, the authoritarianism continues. Many older Paraguayans  particularly those with links to the military  remember the dictatorship as a time of prosperity. At a Colorado rally in Asuncin two weeks before the election, Abdo Bentez defended the example of his father and the Colorado legacy. Its the party that has built this country, he said. Hes going to win by far. Hes a holy, clean, hardworking young man, said a retiree who gave her name as Mara Luisa. My husband worked for 15 years in the security services, she added. Im a Stronista through and through.   Related: Paraguayan rape victim, 14, dies giving birth    Abdo Bentez will take a strongly conservative line on abortion (Paraguay forbids the termination of pregnancy in practically all cases), LGBT rights and gender equality, said Andrew Nickson, a Paraguay expert at the University of Birmingham. He added that Abdo Bentezs father had never been personally linked to human rights abuses. He was a crook and a sycophant but thats about all, Nickson said. Abdo Bentezs advisors emphasise his commitment to Paraguays institutions and record as a senator of building consensus across party lines. I think hes demonstrated on many opportunities his democratic credentials, said one. He has always mentioned the shortcomings of the dictatorship, the adviser added, suggesting that Paraguays young society  nearly 60% of the population was born after 1989  now had the necessary antibodies to resist any democratic backsliding. The dwindling number of activists who remember authoritarian rule are also counting on a new generation. There are many young people who arent afraid because they didnt live through the repression of the dictatorship, said Goibur. He hopes that Abdo Bentez will honour a pledge to maintain funding for the search for desaparecidos. I always say: Im looking for Dad, but Im looking for everyone, he explained. And while my strength lasts and blood runs through my veins Ill do it. Excavating human remains did not scare him, he added. You have to be afraid of those who are alive, not the dead."
"111""Israels airports authority has refused to display adverts informing female passengers that it is illegal for airline staff to ask them to move seats at the behest of ultra-Orthodox Jewish men. 
The Israel Religious Action Center (IRAC) had planned to display the billboard ads at Ben Gurion airport, near Tel Aviv, during Passover, the Jewish holiday that ends on Saturday. 
IRACs ad campaign follows a court ruling in June in favour of an 82-year-old Holocaust survivor, Renee Rabinowitz, who sued Israels national airline, El Al, for gender discrimination. Cabin crew had asked her to move when an ultra-Orthodox man refused to take his seat next to her. 
In a case supported by IRAC, the judge ruled that under absolutely no circumstances can a crew member ask a passenger to move from their designated seat because the adjacent passenger doesnt want to sit next to them due to their gender. 
El Al was given 45 days to amend its policies and was ordered to pay compensation to Rabinowitz. Women travelling on the airline have been frequently asked to move seats in recent years. 
IRACs ads, which read Ladies, please take your seat  and keep it!, remind passengers that requests to change seats on the grounds of gender are illegal. The organisation, which is linked to the Movement for Reform Judaism, also released a video encouraging female passengers to report any such requests. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
IRAC said it had reached an agreement on the fee to display the ads when the airports authority denied permission, on the grounds that we steer clear of any advertising that is political or divisive. 
Anat Hoffman, executive director of the organisation, said the ad campaign should not be considered controversial as it informed airline passengers of their legal rights.  
 
  Related: Retired lawyer sues Israeli airline after she was asked to move seat  
 
She told the Guardian that asking female passengers to move on grounds of gender was discriminatory, dehumanising and illegal.  
Since the ruling, we believe its still happening. Women are still not sure whether its kosher or not kosher, she said. The dynamic is that a Haredi [ultra-Orthodox] man refuses to take his seat, then other passengers, instead of telling him to sit down, focus on the women, saying, Why dont you just move, so the plane can take off? 
In 2011, Israels high court ruled that gender segregation on buses could not be forced. After we won that case, we still had to bring 13 lawsuits against individual drivers. We won 13 times, then the bus companies started enforcing their policies, Hoffman said. 
If the airports authority wont allow our billboards, we will ask them to make their own ads telling people of their policies. And if they dont do that, we may have to sue them."
"112""Theresa May has been urged to apologise for Britains historical legacy of anti-gay laws across the Commonwealth as leaders of the 53 member states gather for a summit in London on Monday.  Gay rights campaigner Peter Tatchell argued that the government should help address colonial-era legislation that treats more than 100 million lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans people across the Commonwealth as criminals.  The prime minister went further than any of her predecessors when she acknowledged last year that Britain had a special responsibility to help change hearts and minds on anti-gay laws as a result.  The Guardian understands that the government plans to make an announcement on the issue at the heads of government summit later this week  but will avoid any grand political gestures that might prompt accusations of neocolonial lecturing.    Related: We won in Trinidad. Now its time to end all homophobic laws in the Commonwealth    Former prime minister David Cameron was criticised in 2011 when he told Commonwealth leaders at a meeting in Australia that UK foreign aid should become conditional on their decriminalisation of homosexuality.  Tatchell, a veteran campaigner, said: I urge Theresa May to acknowledge and apologise for what Britain did by forcing homophobic laws on colonial peoples. These laws remain today and are menacing the lives of millions of LGBT people in Commonwealth countries.  An apology would wrong-foot homophobes in the anti-gay member states by highlighting the nonindigenous nature of their current homophobic legislation. He added: The humility and remorse of an apology would be far more powerful and effective than neocolonial lecturing and denunciation of homophobia by the UK government. Last week, Britain was accused of caving in to pressure from Commonwealth governments that criminalise homosexuality over the publication of a guide on international best practice on sexual orientation and gender identity.  Same-sex relations are still illegal in 36 Commonwealth member states, including nine that have a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.  Labour peer and gay rights campaigner Waheed Alli said the summit, the first in the UK since 1997, presented a unique opportunity for the government to ensure that LGBT rights was a key part of the agenda.  Lord Alli said: I would urge the prime minister to recognise the special responsibility the UK has to be part of decriminalising homosexuality across the Commonwealth, given our historic role in imposing these laws on other countries in the first place. It is vital that ministers make the most of this opportunity to speak to other leaders and support LGBT civil society groups working on the ground in often dangerous situations. He suggested that decriminalising homosexuality should be a basic principle of UK foreign policy, with ministers developing a clear plan for each country based on lobbying government, boosting grassroots efforts and supporting legal action.  Tory MP Nick Herbert, chair of the all-party group on global LGBT rights, added: These are countries which have flagrantly breached the Commonwealth charter by their treatment of LGBT people, and both the government and the Commonwealth itself should call them out on it.  The FCO [Foreign and Commonwealth Office] has been doing a lot of good work, and the prime minister has taken a stronger stand than ever before. What we should avoid is raising the issue in a way which backfires. The group, which is supported by 100 MPs and peers across the political parties, published a major report in 2016 that highlighted the need for ministers to do more to tackle serious human rights abuses suffered by LGBT people across the globe.  Paul Dillane, director of the Kaleidoscope Trust, said: The summit is a test for the UK as to how it sensitively approaches the issue of international LGBT rights, particularly given our colonial past. This years summit will officially host gay rights activists under the umbrella of the Commonwealth Equality Network, giving grassroots campaigners the opportunity to lobby international government ministers and officials directly.  A Downing Street spokeswomen said: This is an important issue and one many people across our country rightly feel strongly about.  As the prime minister has said, we have a special responsibility to help change hearts and minds, and we will ensure that these important issues are discussed during the Commonwealth summit week.  Last week, British diver Tom Daley made a plea for Commonwealth countries to decriminalise homosexuality after winning a gold medal at the Commonwealth Games in Australia. The athlete tweeted:     G O L D  37 of the competing nations criminalise being LGBT+. I feel so lucky to be able to be openly who I am without worry. I hope one day every athlete from every nation in the commonwealth will be free to compete openly as who they are too!  pic.twitter.com/ry4GPiZhdB&mdash; Tom Daley (@TomDaley1994) April 13, 2018    The next Commonwealth summit, in two years time, was widely expected to be held in Malaysia. However, it has been suggested that the south-east Asian countrys gay rights record, among other issues, could mean it is hosted elsewhere.  Last week, a court judgment in Trinidad and Tobago raised hopes that gay sex between consenting men could soon be decriminalised, and campaigners said similar decisions might follow elsewhere in the Caribbean.  However, in other countries, such as Nigeria and Uganda, the situation is getting worse."
"113""When a van was driven on to a Toronto pavement on Tuesday, killing 10 people and injuring 15, police chief Mark Saunders said that, while the incident appeared to be a deliberate act, there was no evidence of terrorism. The public safety minister Ralph Goodale backed this up, deeming the event not part of an organised terror plot. Canada has rules about these things: to count as terrorism, the attacker must have a political, religious or social motivation, something beyond wanting to terrorise. Why have the authorities been so fast to reject the idea of terrorism (taking as read that this may change; the tragedy is very fresh)? Shortly before the attack, a post appeared on the suspects Facebook profile, hailing the commencement of the Incel Rebellion, including the line Private (Recruit)  Infantry 00010, wishing to speak to Sgt 4chan please. C23249161. (4chan is the main organising platform for the alt-right, explains Mike Wendling, the author of Alt-Right: from 4Chan to the White House.) There is a reluctance to ascribe to the incel movement anything so lofty as an ideology or credit it with any developed, connected thinking, partly because it is so bizarre in conception. Standing for involuntarily celibate, the term was originally invented 20 years ago by a women known only as Alana, who coined the term as a name for an online support forum for singles, basically a lonely hearts club. It feels like being the scientist who figured out nuclear fission and then discovers its being used as a weapon for war, she says, describing the feeling of watching it mutate into a Reddit muster point for violent misogyny.   Related: Who are the 'incels' and how do they relate to Toronto van attack?    It is part of the manosphere, but is distinguished from mens rights activism by what Wendling  who is also the editor of BBC Trending, the broadcasters social media investigation unit  calls its raw hatred. It is vile. It is just incredibly unhinged and separate from reality and completely raw. It has some crossover with white supremacism, in the sense that its adherents hang out in the same online spaces and share some of the same terminology, but it is quite distinctive in its hate figures: Stacys (attractive women); Chads (attractive men); and Normies (people who arent incels, ie can find partners but arent necessarily attractive). Basically, incels cannot get laid and they violently loathe anyone who can. Some of the fault, in their eyes, is with attractive men who have sex with too many women  We need to do something about the polygamy problem, said the Incelcast, an astonishing three-hour podcast about the Toronto attack  but, of course, the main problem is women themselves, who become foes as people, but also as a political entity. There is a lot of discussion about how best to punish them, with mass rape fantasies and threads on how to follow women without getting arrested, just for the thrill of having them notice you. Feminism is held responsible for a dude who cant get laid, and birth control is said to have caused women to date only Chads. It causes all sorts of negative social ramifications. There are no numbers on how many adherents this doctrine has, or how extreme they are, but its not one tiny bit of Reddit says Wendling. Its big. Its substantial. Its a movement that has tens of thousands of people who visit these boards, these sub-Reddits, that are safe places for them. Angela Nagle is the author of Kill All Normies: Online Culture Wars from 4Chan and Tumblr to Trump and the Alt-Right. She says: There is a really interesting irony in the incel style of quasipolitics  they are both a response to and advocates of almost an Ayn Randian view of romance and human relationships. So they rail against the loneliness and the isolation and the individualism of modern life, but they seem to advocate it as well, in that they love the language of the strong triumphing over the weak. But they themselves are the weak. Their landscape is strewn with completely unsquarable contradiction: Theyll say how terrible it is that the left has won the culture wars and we should return to traditional hierarchies, but then theyll use terms like banging sluts, which doesnt make any sense, right? Nagle continues. Because you have to pick one. They want sexual availability and yet, at the same time, they express this disgust at promiscuity.   Related: If incels violent misogyny had a role in Toronto, we mustnt downplay it | Emer OToole    Incels obsess over their own unattractiveness  dividing the world into alphas and betas, with betas just your average, frustrated idiot dude, and omegas, as the incels often call themselves, the lowest of the low, scorned by everyone  they then use that self-acceptance as an insulation. They feel this makes them untouchable in their quest for supremacy over sluts. They borrow a lot of language from the equality/civil rights agenda  society treats single men like trash, and it has to stop. The people in power, women, can change this, but they refuse to. They have blood on their hands, read one post the morning after the Toronto attack. Basically, their virginity is a discrimination or apartheid issue, and only a state-distributed girlfriend programme, outlawing multiple partners, can rectify this grand injustice. Yet at the same time, they hate victims, snowflakes, liberals, those who campaign for any actual equality. The less sense their outlook makes, the more sense it makes, on some elemental level. Coherence, consistency, reason  these are all tools by which we understand, accommodate, include and listen to one another. In a purely authoritarian worldview, those are the rules you most enjoy not playing by. That makes it very difficult to formulate a response to, on an intellectual level, let alone a practical one: you cant argue with a schema whose principle is that it will not brook argument. But the regular alternative  ridicule  is not necessarily wise, or right. Elliot Rodger, the Isla Vista killer, uploaded a video to YouTube about his retribution against attractive women who wouldnt sleep with him (and the attractive men they would sleep with) before killing six people in 2014. He was named by the Southern Poverty Law Center (which tracks activity on the far right) as the first terrorist of the alt-right: so even if incels dont describe the full extent of far-right activity, so far they have been its most devastating subgroup. There is this huge disconnect between the threat they pose  which is, even if we accept Rodger as only a foot soldier, deadly  and the things they talk about, which are often absurd. In the sphere of the pickup, seduction is weaponised in the gender war: there is a huge amount of discussion about its finer points, but its core and only principle is that you get women to sleep with you (and behave) by making them feel insecure. When this, amazingly, doesnt work, incels disappear down the wormhole of the black pill: the game is rigged from the start. Appearance is everything. If youre dealt a bad hand, youve lost before youve started. This escalates to violent fantasy, since if the game is rigged, then the only thing that will get attractive women to sleep with you is force. Attractive men are collateral damage in the violent fantasy, though it is interesting that message boards can get away with a lot of mass rape fantasy, only to be shut down when a man starts fantasising about castrating his male roommate. From the way chatroom moder-ators respond to threats of violence against women, to the reluctance among authorities to name this as a terrorist threat, I am filled with this unsettling sense that because incels mainly want to kill, maim or assault women, they are simply not taken as seriously as if they wanted to kill pretty much anyone else. Doesnt everyone want to kill women, sometimes, is the implication? Or at least give them a fright? Their behaviour is often ridiculous  someone last week got a tattoo of Jordan Petersons face (he is the pop philosopher of meninism) across his entire arm. The incels folk hero is the 30-year-old virgin wizard  if you can make it to 30 without having sex, you will be endowed with magical powers. And the threads are so pathetic that it is hard to feel anything but ambient pity (on the site Wiz Chan  subtitle disregard females, acquire magic  one thread titled How do I live in my sedan? is like a short story). Puzzling in the abstract, weirdly inevitable in the flesh, their stance combines that utterly flaky 90s joking-not-joking (Hey, I was only joking when I said I wanted to rape you! Unless were actually in an alley and theres no one else around), raging self-pity, false appropriation and superhero costumes, all delivered with the deafening rage of the reptilian brain. It makes Four Lions look like Wittgenstein. But this fails to reflect, or reflect on, what modern terrorism is: the perpetrators dont have to meet and their balaclavas dont have to match. All they have to do is establish their hate figures and be consistent. The answer is not simple, Nagle says. We end up talking about, say, gun laws and all these very surface things. But in America in particular, the root of this is very, very deep. Its my view that the kind of cultural revolution that came to fruition in the 60s, where people were questioning older institutions, was very successful in the breaking down of those institutions. But I think its fair to say, if you look at contemporary American society, that there has been a failure to replace those institutions with anything new to hold society together. So they would say: Women are just out for themselves, so the way to respond to that is to get some muscles and trick them. Love never enters into it. Trust in other people, its all gone. Its a very, very bleak worldview. And theyre not getting that from nowhere."
"114""Top story: Trump escalates war of words with Russia Good morning. This is Martin Farrer. If youre just getting up, or have been on the go for hours, the morning briefing is just for you.  Theresa May will discuss possible British military action against Syria with her cabinet today after summoning ministers for an emergency meeting. She has not ruled out committing Britain to joining the US and France in a show of force without consulting MPs, but says the weekend chemical attack on Douma cannot go unchallenged. The standoff between the western allies and Russia worsened yesterday after the US president, Donald Trump, ramped up the rhetoric by tweeting that Russia should expect an American missile attack on Syria. Get ready Russia, because they will be coming, nice and new and smart!  he said. Russia responded by saying it does not conduct diplomacy by Twitter.  Our diplomatic editor, Julian Borger, says that Trumps remarks are a dangerous development and unlike anything seen from a US president in modern history. In another possible escalation, Mike Pompeo, the CIA director set to become the next US secretary of state, will signal later today that years of soft US policy toward Russia are now over. In prepared remarks to the Senate, he will say the Trump administration considers Russia a danger to our country. Back in Syria, our correspondent Martin Chulov reports that US intelligence operatives have been racing to smuggle corpses out of Douma in order to establish what kind of chemical agent was used along with chlorine in the attack which killed 45 people. * * * Brexit housing woe  The fall in the housing market could hurt the wider economy and influence the Bank of England to hold off on increasing interest rates, according to the latest survey from the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors. In its gloomiest assessment for five years, the estate agents group says demand from buyers fell for the 12th month in a row and the national price balance was the lowest since 2013. One agent said stamp duty and Brexit had killed fluidity in the London market, while another said the rental market was also suffering from a glut of properties. * * * Thanks but no thanks  Yulia Skripal, the Russian women targeted in a poison attack in Salisbury, has said she doesnt need any help from her countrys embassy in the UK. Skripal, who was poisoned with her father, a former double agent, made the comments in a statement issued through the police as she continues to recover from the attack last month. She also asked her cousin, Viktoria, not to try to visit her after the women indicated in the Russian media that she might travel to the UK. The political dimension of the case will take another step today when a summary of a report into the case by the international chemical weapons watchdog will be published. * * * Zuckerberg on the back foot  US congressmen and women must have had the Capitol Hill equivalent of Alex Fergusons halftime hairdryer treatment after they dropped Tuesdays softly-softly approach and started asking Facebook chief Mark Zuckerberg much more searching questions on the second day of his grilling in Washington. Although the billionaire founder remained evasive  at one point claiming he didnt understand a straightforward question about his business model  he was put on the spot about privacy and forced to admit that his personal information was among that farmed by Cambridge Analytica. He was also compared to the notorious FBI boss, J Edgar Hoover, who spent decades spying on American politicians, celebrities and ordinary citizens.  * * *     Susan Fowler. Photograph: Shalon Van Tine    Stop the harassment  Susan Fowler, the former Uber software engineer whose blogpost about sexual harassment sparked a wider movement for gender equality, is using her accidental cachet to campaign against a practice known as forced arbitration. This allows companies to push employee complaints into secretive hearings about workplace disputes, silence victims and often protect serial offenders. In an interview with the Guardian, Fowler, whose fame extended to featuring on the cover of Time magazine, says: This would be the biggest thing you could do to stop the cycle of harassment, discrimination and retaliation in the workplace. * * * Miracle baby  A remarkable story from China where a baby boy has been born four years after his parents died in a car crash. Shen Jie and Liu Xi were in the middle of IVF treatment when they were killed, leaving their parents to fight a long legal battle for the custody of the remaining embryos. They won and the boy, Tiantian, was born to a surrogate mother.  Lunchtime read: why the cold war offers a lesson for capitalism     The last decade has been tough for ordinary families. Illustration: Eva Bee    Our economics editor, Larry Eliiott, has a tour dhorizon this morning on the rightward shift in the post-cold war world and what it all means for the alignment of politics across the west. The centre lefts decision to embrace the discipline of the global marketplace since 1990 has been disastrous, he writes, leading to an intellectual vacuum when the global financial crisis struck. Voters have been left to cope with the harsh effects of austerity while the financiers who created the crisis continue as before. The cold war years showed that managed capitalism did a better job of providing people with hope and the things they want: a job, a pension, a home and a future. In the cold war years the mainstream parties made sure to provide these things, but no longer. The result is that they are turning to populism. Sport A late penalty by Cristiano Ronaldo for Real Madrid prevented a remarkable comeback by Juventus in their Champions League quarter-final, the Spanish giants going through 4-3 on aggregate over their old rivals after almost blowing a 3-0 lead from the first leg. An equally fierce rivalry has seen Sunderland decide to have no cash turnstiles for their remaining home fixtures in order to prevent Newcastle fans filling the Stadium of Light to gloat at the old enemys expected relegation to League One. Catch up with the Commonwealth Games where heptathlon hope Katarina Johnson-Thompson is competing. Our live blog is here. Business A cheap treatment for hepatitis C has proved to be just as effective as medicine costing 160 times more. In an exclusive story, our business reporter Julia Kollewe reveals that trials of the combined pill treatment worked in 97% of cases. It will cost $300 for a 12-week course compared with $48,000 for the branded drug Harvoni. The pound is down slightly at $1.417 but up a smidgen at 1.147.  The papers Theres no doubt about the main story today with most leading on the Syria crisis. The Telegraph has an extravagant display of Trumps missile tweet and the splash headline Trump warns missiles are coming. The Times  May prepares Britain to launch assault on Assad  and the Mail  Mays great gamble  both focus on the domestic angle to the story.      Guardian front page, Thursday 12 April 2018. Photograph: The Guardian for the Guardian    The Guardian reports that the Met has run out of leads in the Stephen Lawrence case, but its main story is also the Middle East under the headline Trump warns Russia to get ready for US missile strike on Syria. The Express reckons were One tweet from war while the Mirror thinks were On Brink. The FT goes with Tesco seals comeback with profits topping 1bn. For more news: www.theguardian.com Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here."
"115""Today, a simple marker on a street corner in Memphis, Tennessee commemorates the Peoples Grocery lynching. In 1892 three black men, co-owners of a store giving white businesses a run for their money, were attacked, fought back and were arrested. They never stood trial. A white mob broke into the jail, dragged them away and lynched them. The murders were grieved by their friend Ida B Wells, an African American teacher, journalist, civil rights pioneer and suffragist about whom it was once said: She has plenty of nerve; she is as smart as a steel trap, and she has no sympathy with humbug.    embed   Wells was galvanised to count, investigate and report lynchings in America as no one had done before, hurling her 5ft frame into hostile territory with all the fearlessness of a war reporter. For a century she has languished as an unsung heroine, overshadowed by more familiar giants of the civil rights movement. In recent years, however, her crusading activism and muckraking techniques are being rediscovered. A society for investigative reporting bears her name; the New York Times  which once branded her a slanderous and nasty-minded mulattress  just published a belated obituary, and there are moves to name a street after her in New York and build a monument in Chicago.    One has to ask: Would I have the courage to do that? There was no help going to come for you, no protection from the law  Nikole Hannah-Jones     I consider her my spiritual grandmother, says Nikole Hannah-Jones, an investigative journalist covering civil rights. She was was a trailblazer in every way ... as a feminist, as a suffragist, as an investigative reporter, as a civil rights leader. She was just an all-around badass. Wells was born into slavery in Holly Springs, Mississippi, during the civil war. She was orphaned at 16 after her parents  as well as a younger brother  died from a yellow fever epidemic. She found work as a teacher to support her five remaining siblings, then moved to Memphis, where she became a leading journalist and civil rights activist. At 21, Wells clashed with a white train conductor who ordered her to move from the ladies car to the a section designated for black passengers, despite her having bought a first class ticket. When she refused and the conductor tried to forcibly move her, Wells fastened her teeth on the back of his hand, as she wrote later.  Wells sued after being ejected from the train and won the case (a newspaper headline declared Darky damsel gets damages), though the decision was later reversed in court. By the time Wells turned 25, she was the co-owner and editor of the Free Speech and Headlight, a local black newspaper, a platform she used to skewer racial inequality. Then came the Peoples Grocery Lynching. She denounced it in print, armed herself with a pistol and spent months traveling alone in the south, researching more than 700 lynchings from the previous decade. Some 4,075 African Americans were lynched in 12 southern states between 1877 and 1950, according to the Equal Justice Initiatives 2015 report, Lynching in America. Some were witnessed by big crowds who brought children and picnic baskets, as if at a public entertainment.     A crowd surrounds two African American men hanging from nooses on a pole. Photograph: Library of Congress/Corbis/VCG via Getty Images    Wellss great-granddaughter, Michelle Duster, an author and public speaker, says: They would torture people before they were killed and dismember them afterwards and pass around the body parts. It was shocking to me that people would take bones as souvenirs. The more I learned about the level of violence, the more I appreciated what it took for her to do what she did. I am just amazed. Wells visited places where people had been hanged, shot, beaten, burned alive, drowned or mutilated. She examined photos of victims hanging from trees as mobs looked on, pored over local newspaper accounts, took sworn statements from eyewitnesses and, on occasion, even hired private investigators. It was astoundingly courageous work in an era of Jim Crow segregation and in which women did not have the vote. Hannah-Jones, who writes for the New York Times Magazine, says: There was no protection from the law for a black women who was going into territories where black people had been stolen from the jail and lynched with the help of law enforcement.  These places would have been hostile to a black person questioning these communities at all, but think about the types of emotion in a community that has just lynched someone and strung their body up for public display and then to have a black women come in there asking questions. One has to ask: Would I have the courage to do that? There was no help that was going to come for you. There was no protection from the law. Black folks didnt even have a lot of legal rights and they certainly didnt have much protection from law enforcement.   s Grocery lynching of African-American proprietors Thomas Moss, Calvin McDowell and Will Stewart in 1892.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"651\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A marker on a street corner in the Soulsville neighbourhood marks the spot of the Peoples Grocery lynching of African-American proprietors Thomas Moss, Calvin McDowell and Will Stewart in 1892. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters    Wells, however, was a force of nature who once said, One had better die fighting injustice than die like a dog or a rat in a trap. On another occasion, she wrote: I had already determined to sell my life as dearly as possible if attacked. If I could take one lyncher with me, this would even up the score a little bit. She destroyed the mainstream medias narratives that suggested lynching victims were criminals  often rapists of white women  who got their just desserts. Her reporting showed that rape had not been alleged in two thirds of the lynchings or was only alleged after a covert, consensual, interracial relationship had been exposed. Duster says: She was putting names to stories and names to statistics. She was putting context into what was happening. Without what she did, it was pretty much OK, this person committed a crime, they got what they deserved. She said, No, they did not commit a crime. The narrative of the mainstream media at this time was very different from the reality she found on the ground. Hannah-Jones adds: Much like the killing of black people by police today, the official story of lynchings was just largely accepted, which was that black men were rapists and that unknown vigilantes were just meting out justice to black brutes. You can look at the way that newspapers covered these things and that was just accepted and Ida B Wells exposed the reality behind lynchings, which is that they were often used as economic retaliation. They were used to sow fear in black communities so that black people would stay in their place and she exposed the truth about that. She also exposed that while law enforcement would often say they these lynchings occur at the hands of parties unknown, everyone in town knew who committed them and often law enforcement took part. While Wells was out of town, a mob destroyed her printing press in Memphis and threatened to kill her if she returned. She stayed away from the south for more than three decades but toured the US and UK, raising awareness through public speaking. In 1895 she published a pamphlet, the Red Record, the first statistical record of the history of American lynchings, a forerunner of data journalism projects such as The Counted, the Guardians project to document people killed by police. Hannah-Jones says: She was one of the first people to actually tally the number of lynchings that were happening. We like to say she was one of our early data reporters. She began to collect data on this to show how actually vast the scope of the problem was.    One had better die fighting injustice than die like a dog or a rat in a trap  Ida B Wells     Wells married Chicago lawyer and newspaper editor Ferdinand Barnett and, uncommonly for the time, hyphenated her name rather than take his. The couple had four children. Wells jugged motherhood, journalism and civil rights. In 1909, she was one of the founders of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), although was later ousted because she was perceived as too radical. She also worked with Susan B Anthony as a leader in the movement for women suffrage. When Wells died in 1931 at the age of 68 from a brief illness due to kidney failure, her influence was waning, her autobiography was unfinished and her ambition of a federal anti-lynching law was unrealised. Duster muses: She went out with a whimper. She was almost obsolete. She writes in her autobiography that there was a generation who didnt know who she was and didnt know about lynching. She wrote the book to stop it being forgotten. Wells and Barnett are interred together in the Oak Woods cemetery in Chicago. She remains a little known figure in America and abroad. Hannah-Jones, who adopted the Twitter handle Ida Bae Wells, reflects: A lot of people have no idea who Ida B Wells is. To this day people think my name is Ida; they dont even get the reference of my Twitter handle. I think her being a women, and a black women, were things that pretty much guaranteed her obscurity. She was also written out of the suffrage movement even though she played a huge role in it and was trying to push the white suffragists on racial equality. Both her gender and her race are the reasons why she was largely written out of history. But now she is inspiring a new generation of women in journalism. Hannah-Jones is co-founder of the Ida B Wells Society for Investigative Reporting, which aims to increase the ranks, retention and profile of reporters and editors of colour in the field.  What if Wells herself were alive today? I think she would be very unsurprised by the America of 2018, she says. In many ways it would look very familiar to her. As long as she was able, she would be one of the sharpest critics of this country right now."
"116""I am not about to become an apologist for the policies and practices of the Saudi regime, abhorrent as many of them are. However, your editorial (The kingdoms rulers say they are advancing women by locking them up, 22&#xa0;May) misses an opportunity to&#xa0;encourage a more liberal approach by Saudi Arabia. I recently visited the kingdom with a Labour parliamentary delegation. By no means were all of our meetings arranged by the Saudi government and we met many women working in a variety of roles; lecturers, doctors, one a project manager for the development of the new Riyadh metro system. We also came across&#xa0;many women out and about&#xa0;in groups, with their children, or even alone. There is a very positive view of the proposed changes contained in Prince Mohammed bin Salmans reform programme. Opening up job opportunities to women without university qualifications (very much welcomed by families on lower incomes) and identifying ways to&#xa0;provide good vocational training to the youth of the country (70%&#xa0;plus of the population is under the age of 35) are initiatives to be welcomed, and are designed to both bring the kingdom into the 21st century and broaden its very narrow economic base. At no time was I required to wear an abaya. White silk shirt and long silk trousers were completely acceptable even for our audience with the king. In my many years of fighting for gender equality in the UK I have never believed that change would come overnight, nor that criticising small steps forward persuaded the holders of power to move on and do better. It is in the interests of us all for countries in the Middle East to develop more informed and liberal societies. Margaret ProsserLabour, House of Lords   Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"117""The chair of the Commons business select committee has accused top City law firm Slaughter &amp; May of masking the true extent of its gender pay gap with bogus data. 
Rachel Reeves said the law firms decision not to voluntarily publish the data of its partners  who are the most well paid and senior members of the firm  meant that its reported pay gap was meaningless. 
This year, for the first time, all companies and public bodies with more than 250 employees were legally obliged to publish the gap between the average amount paid to a man in their business compared with the average for a women. 
 
  
  
   
    What is being published?
    
    All companies and some public sector bodies in Great Britain, except Northern Ireland, with more than 250 employees had to&nbsp;report their gender pay gap to the Government Equalities Office for the first time by by 4 April 2018. The second year of gender pay gap reports&nbsp; - and the first indicator of how public bodies and companies are performing - must be filed by April 2019
    
    What is the gender pay gap?
    
    The gender pay gap is the difference between the average hourly earnings of men and women. The figure is expressed as a proportion of mens earnings. According to the ONS, the gap between what UK male and female workers earn  based on median hourly earnings for all workers&nbsp; -was 17.9% in April 2018, down from 18.4% in April 2017.
    
    Whats the difference between the mean and the median figures?
    
    Commonly known as the average, the mean is calculated by adding up the wages of all employees and dividing that figure by the number of employees. The mean gender pay gap is the difference between mean male pay and mean female pay.
    The median gap is the difference between the employee in the middle of the range of male wages and the employee in the middle of the range of female wages. Typically the median is the more representative figure, because the mean can be skewed by a handful of highly paid employees.
    
   
  
  
 
In evidence to the select committee on Tuesday, Louise Meikle, director of human resources at Slaughter &amp; May, said the firm had not published partners pay as it was not part of the statutory duty and it was unclear how it should be calculated to ensure fair comparison with similar firms.  
She said: Were not trying to hide the statistics about gender balance at the top. Meikle added that law firm would happily publish data if it had clear guidance on how to do so. 
But Reeves suggested Slaughter &amp; May was not revealing the true proportion of women at the top of its organisation and had published bogus numbers. 
What is being masked is the true gender pay gap, Reeves said Data youve published shows that in the top quartile of your organisation 46.7% are women. We know that is just not true at Slaughter &amp; May because youve just told us that 76% of partners are male so thats pretty meaningless isnt it? 
The gender pay gap data compares men in all roles with women in all roles, rather than those in similar jobs, in a bid to highlight the prevalence of men in high-paid management roles and to encourage change.  
Companies are also obliged to provide data on the proportion of men and women in the best and least well paid roles. Legally, they did not have to include partners pay, but two of the other four magic circle big City law firms, Clifford Chance and Linklaters, did so voluntarily."
"118""Canada will soon recognize new gender options on its formal government surveys, paving the way for an overhauled census and a recognition of the need for greater inclusion in its statistical models.  In future data collection  including the 2021 census  respondents will find a new question on gender identity. Instead of just male or female, respondents will be provided with a third option, which they are asked to indicate how they identify.  This is really delightful news, Susan Gapka, a longtime trans advocate in Toronto, told the Guardian. Gapka and others participated in consultations held by Statistics Canada last year, in which they provided feedback to the countrys statistical agency. I was pleased with the discussions we had and its great to see theyre following up on this strategy. The move reflects a two-year process of fine-turning the survey process, said Laurent Martel, director of demography at Statistics Canada. We want to make sure all Canadians can identify themselves within the census, he said.  Following its 2016 census, Statistics Canada received comments from respondents and criticism from advocacy groups after its 2016 survey only provided the option to select male or female.  The census did encourage transgender Canadians to indicate the gender with which they most associate themselves and gave the option of leaving the question blank, providing a written explanation of the unanswered question in a comment box. Those comments prompted statisticians to contact community groups to understand how to better develop a statistical model that best samples the population, said Martel.  The news follows a move by Ontario to issue its first non-binary birth certificate last week.    Related: 'The system's violating everyone': the Canadian trans parent fighting to keep gender markers off cards    Gapka said that a public education campaignwould still be critical for the success of the project. There are a lot of people dont understand the nuance of gender identity and even sexual orientation. Its a new field for them. A number of countries already have third gender options in formal government surveys. Pakistan, Nepal and India all allow respondents to indicate a gender independent of male or female. Gapka said the rapid change is positive. We dont know what a world without gender looks like, said Gapka. But its really wonderful to imagine."
"119""The Spanish newspaper El Pas has appointed its first gender correspondent after lobbying from its female journalists, and in recognition of the fact that society is undergoing a profound change after the #MeToo movement and recent large-scale women rights protests across the country. The paper, which was founded 42 years ago as Spain began its transition to democracy following the death of Franco, said greater attention had to be paid to the new role women have in society. It added: This isnt just about writing more stories about women; its about including more women in the stories. On International women Day on 8 March, more than 5 million workers took part in Spains first feminist strike to protest against sexual discrimination, domestic violence and the gender pay gap.   Related: Spanish newsreaders wear black in protest against political interference    At the end of April, demonstrations were held across the country after five men accused of the gang-rape of a teenager during the running of the bulls festival in Pamplona were found guilty of the lesser offence of sexual abuse.  The trial, known as the Wolfpack case after the nickname the group gave itself, shocked Spain and led the government to announce a review of sexual offences legislation.  The huge turnout in Spain on 8 March, the protests over the Wolfpack sentence and the earthquake of reports of sexual abuse weve seen through #MeToo  which has given rise to the #TellIt (#Cuntalo) movement in Spanish  all give an idea of where feminism is in the 21st century, El Pas said. The paper added its commitment to gender issues would be evident across all its sections and would inform its international coverage, particularly in Latin America. Pilar lvarez, who will be the papers first gender correspondent, said the move was intended to yield more in-depth and ambitious coverage of whats going on with women. She added: Its not just about women; the word gender also covers men and were very much looking at whats going on with men and how men are changing. lvarez said one of the main tasks would be investigating what comes after #MeToo and the recent protests in Spain. Theyve been followed by a lot of agitation and noise and were going to do what journalists do: separate the noise from the facts, she added. Were also going to keep a lookout so we can balance out the presence of men and women in the news. The announcement follows similar initiatives elsewhere. In October last year, the New York Times appointed a gender editor while the Washington Post has advertised for a gender columnist."
"120""Hundreds of companies are being pursued by Britains equality watchdog after failing to file gender pay gap data on time. This year, for the first time, all companies and public bodies with more than 250 employees were legally obliged to publish the gap between the average amount paid to a man in their business compared with the average for a women.  The data compares men in all roles with women in all roles, rather than those in similar jobs, in a bid to highlight the prevalence of men in high-paid and management roles and to encourage companies to make changes. More than 10,600 employers have reported the gender pay gap data alongside their bonus pay gap and the proportion of men and women in four different pay grades. Last month, the Equality and Human Rights Commission, which is responsible for enforcing the legislation, contacted 1,500 companies who had failed to report by the 4 April deadline. Since then, some have complied or been found not to be covered by the legislation. However the EHRC said it was still investigating up to 500 companies. Rebecca Hilsenrath, the EHRC chief executive, said: Breach of these regulations is breaking the law and weve always been clear we will enforce with zero tolerance. Under the statutory investigation, the EHRC is obliged to publish the terms of reference within a month of providing employers with a first draft. It is also expected to name the companies being targeted. After publishing the terms of reference it will gather evidence over a two-week period and provide a draft report within another 14 days. The final report is expected to be published three weeks later after considering representations from the employer or their lawyers.      Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk   Those firms that try to avoid the statutory requirement could face a summary conviction, an unlimited fine and be forced to publish the data under a court order. The Guardians analysis of the 10,014 employers who submitted data by the deadline revealed that almost eight out of 10 paid men more than women. No sector paid women more than men on average. The data showed women were being paid a median hourly rate that, on average, was 9.7% less than their male colleagues received."
"121""Men should work less and their employers and the government should help them to do so in order to close the gender pay gap, according to a thinktank. A report from the IPPR says there is a gender pay gap in 80% of clearly defined occupations. This points to seniority as a critical driver of the pay gap: for most occupations, men are in more senior, high-pay versions of the role than women, said Catherine Colebrook, IPPRs chief economist and co-author of the report, The State of Pay.  All companies with more than 250 employees were required to publish their gender pay gap for the first time in April, and the data showed that eight out of 10 companies paid women less on an average hourly basis than men. The IPPR report says the majority of companies reported a gap that was smaller than their industry average, suggesting that even if the UKs larger companies closed their gender pay gaps, a disparity would persist at a national level.  What this report tells us is that firms are a big part of the solution to fixing the gender pay gap but they cant do it on their own, said Colebrook. The solutions also have to come from individuals and from government. In short, men need to work fewer hours and women need to work more. Colebrook pointed to the motherhood penalty, by which the gender pay gap increases sharply after women take time out of work to have children and find their ability to progress in the workplace after returning is curtailed. According to research from the Institute for Fiscal Studies undertaken for the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, by the time a first child has reached 20, mothers earn almost a third less per hour, on average, than similarly educated fathers. The IPPR report argues that new ways of making sure women keep pace with their male counterparts on pay and seniority are needed. Women are less likely to negotiate salaries when starting a new job and when in post, so employers could rule out the possibility of negotiation altogether or make sure all employees earn at least as much as any new recruit on the same level, said Colebrook. She said women were less likely to pursue promotions, and suggested employers could automatically consider employees for promotion after a given length of time in post, interview all internal candidates for vacancies, and encourage more women to apply for internal promotions. Companies could also advertise that salaries were negotiable, offer successful candidates the option of a colleague to negotiate on their behalf, and match salary offers to make sure all employees on the same level earn as much as a new recruit. More roles needed to be flexible, and more senior roles should to be offered as a job share, she added.  But changing the behaviour of fathers  for example, encouraging them to take shared parental leave and work part-time  was also needed, she said. The report states: Employers should encourage more men to work flexibly and to take time out for caring responsibilities. Colebrook said: Changing mens working behaviour is a crucial component of equalising pay. Employers could offer paid paternity leave on a use it or lose it basis, make jobs flexible by default and encourage men to job-share. Mary-Ann Stephenson, director of the women Budget Group, said the report painted a depressing picture but highlighted what could be done differently. Closing the pay gap is not just about employers. We all need to tackle the unequal distribution of care work, the gendered division of labour within the workforce and, ultimately, the type of work that we value and reward within society, she said."
"122""They came in a steady stream, picking their way across a garden in central Oxford to the Quaker meeting room beyond. A crowd of largely middle-aged women, the sort you would find at any literary festival or school open evening; friends exchanging kisses, a baby squawking in a pushchair. Only the chanting protesters outside gave the game away. For this was a meeting called by the feminist organisation womens Place to discuss potential changes in the law on gender recognition, and that meant tension in the air. At a recent meeting in Bristol, masked activists tried to stop speakers entering the building. In Cardiff, the venue cancelled the women booking after threats were made. Last month, a trans activist called Tara Wolf was convicted of assaulting Maria Maclachlan, a 61-year-old feminist, during a protest at Speakers Corner in Hyde Park where Maclachlan was filming trans activists. Oxfords student-led protest went more peacefully, but some attendees were evidently shaken enough to leave by a back door afterwards; others were thrown at being on the sharp end of an equality demo. Im usually the protester, said one women, emerging from the scrum. But this issue turns old certainties on their head. womens Place formed last autumn out of a conversation literally around a kitchen table, according to teacher and co-founder Philipa Harvey, between a group of friends  trade unionists, academics, lawyers and others  worried that they had nowhere to debate freely. They wanted to discuss the potential implications for women and girls of sharing single-sex spaces  from domestic violence refuges and female prisons to swimming pool changing rooms and Brownie packs  with male-bodied people, and to explore what they see as the risk of predatory non-trans men finding a way to abuse such access to reach vulnerable women. They wanted to discuss bodies and biology without being told that mentioning vaginas excludes women who dont have them. And they suspected other women also had questions they werent asking, for fear of being called transphobic. There are people who will say nothing about this in their workplaces, because their jobs are on the line; in social situations people wont talk about it, says Harvey. But there is a change in the law being proposed and it will impact women. Women have a right to ask: What will the impact look like for my daily life? These are women who feel silenced, erased and intimidated  and yet it is clear that many trans women do, too. It is held against me that you were raised with male privilege, but actually I was beaten up all the time for being effeminate, says Clara Barker, a trans scientist at the University of Oxford, who also leads voluntary work with LGBT young people. Because I was trans I was severely depressed, I was bullied in my workplace, so its like, What privilege is that? She considered going to the meeting after an invite from speaker Nicola Williams, an activist with the gender-critical pressure group Fair Play for Women (the pair met debating each other on TV). But she was afraid of encountering in real life the abuse she experiences online, where jeers about how trans women are really men jostle with threats to bash terfs (trans exclusionary radical feminists, a derogatory term for women questioning trans rights). While the trans movement has its dark side, also hovering on the outer fringes of the gender-critical camp are a handful of men with far-right associations, attracted by a perceived fight against political correctness.   Its held against me that you were raised with male privilege, but I was beaten up all the time for being effeminate. What privilege is that?  Clara Barker.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Its held against me that you were raised with male privilege, but I was beaten up all the time for being effeminate. What privilege is that?  Clara Barker.    I want to be able to engage, even if sometimes Im going to hear things I dont like. Im perfectly willing to listen to the other side, says Barker. But its got to be balanced, its got to be reasoned. I tried to make a couple of comments [on Twitter] just to see if it was possible to find common ground and the truth is, it wasnt. Yet beyond the shouting, the beginning of a more nuanced debate is discernible; one involving trans women who crave equality but not at vulnerable women expense, feminists with divided loyalties, and people wanting more than toxic Facebook slanging matches. There is a difference between social media debate and the conversations going on elsewhere, says Sophie Walker, leader of the women Equality Party, who was torn apart over her partys trans-inclusive stance in one notable Mumsnet webchat, but is now more optimistic about the chances of reaching some consensus. I am encouraged by the number of women who have contacted me privately to say they want to find common ground. Both womens Place and trans activists led by Stonewall have given well-received briefings to Labour MPs in recent months. In Oxford, questions were certainly more plaintive than angry. There was a mother worried about her daughter potentially sharing a tent on Guide camps with trans girls who might still have penises, but anxious no trans child should feel excluded either. Another women complained of being unable to get straight answers about sleeping arrangements on a volunteer project her daughter wants to join. Meanwhile, four platform speakers, including Harvey and Williams, talked of girls needing to feel they can set boundaries around their spaces and women being heard. Six days after the meeting, meanwhile, 300 Labour party members reportedly quit in protest at trans women standing for parliament on all-women shortlists, exposing a split within the left that feels more generational than ideological; woke millennials versus older women who fear hard-won victories being eroded. This isnt just about politics. Its about what it means to be a women, born or made, and feel dismissed. The story began in January 2016, when the new Commons equalities select committee  chaired by the Conservatives former equalities secretary Maria Miller  made its Westminster debut with a report it didnt expect to be enormously controversial, on reforms to the law governing gender recognition. The 2004 Gender Recognition Act (GRA) lets adults officially register a change to the gender assigned at birth. They dont necessarily have to undergo surgery, but must provide psychiatric assessments and proof of living for two years in the gender they wish to be officially recognised, a process activists see as intrusive and overly medicalised. Millers committee broadly agreed, recommending instead a system of self-identification where changing gender was as simple as signing a form. Similar arrangements now exist in Portugal, Ireland, Malta, Belgium, Norway and Denmark, and activists insist there is no evidence of anyone abusing them for sinister purposes, although the numbers involved are relatively small so far (it is estimated up to 1% of Britons may be trans, although there are no official statistics). An Irish government review of how the system is working there, due this autumn, is hotly awaited.   Theres a difference between social media debate and the conversations going on elsewhere  Sophie Walker, leader of the women Equality Party.\" width=\"686\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Theres a difference between social media debate and the conversations going on elsewhere  Sophie Walker, leader of the women Equality Party. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer    Shifting to self-identification doesnt, by itself, automatically mean trans women being treated in all circumstances as if they had been born female. Irish trans women may, for example, still be jailed in male prisons. But crucially, the Miller committees report also backed the curbing of exemptions in the 2010 Equalities Act, which currently allow trans people to be barred from certain jobs and services if necessary to protect other users  the loophole covering sensitive areas such as women refuges. And thats where alarm bells started ringing. It was discrimination law, not the recognition process, that came under scrutiny in Canada after serial sex attacker Christopher Hambrook attacked two women in domestic violence shelters in Toronto, which hed entered dressed as a women. (The state of Ontario had previously passed a bill prohibiting discrimination against trans people.) Significantly, when the then equalities secretary Justine Greening announced a consultation on simplifying the gender-recognition process last July, she did not take up the call to rewrite equality law. women shelters in the UK can still legally turn people away following risk assessments  including women who were born female if, for example, they have a history of offending that might endanger others. People always say, Well anyone could just say theyre a victim of domestic violence but to get into a refuge, well sit and talk to you for ages. There are all sorts of assessments to undergo, says the Labour MP Jess Phillips, who sat on Millers committee and has previously worked for women Aid. But what is worrying both sides is that 10 months (and two equalities secretaries) later, there is still a gaping hole where any consultation should be. Officially, ministers are still deliberating. Unofficially, as one MP puts it, they seem to have started a hare running and then run away, leaving a vacuum to fill with both sides worst fears. In Scotland, where the parliament is consulting on moving to self-identification, women groups and trans organisations have promised to work together to find consensus. But elsewhere, debate is being driven by misinformation pushed out by a few loud voices, according to Stonewall UKs director of campaigns, policy and research Paul Twocock. Everyone assumes the law will change, but isnt sure how; meanwhile, culture is running ahead of it. In practice, refuges will increasingly consider trans women cases on merit, and Twocock says many survivors services have been quietly trans-inclusive for years. A spokeswomen for women Aid says it doesnt set policies for individual members but believes all survivors of domestic abuse must have the right to access the specialist support they need, while stressing that not all services are appropriate for everyone. What worries many gender-critical feminists, however, is that organisations are having to make difficult choices in a climate where any deviation from the principle that trans women are women causes a backlash. Advertisers have been lobbied to withdraw from the parenting site Mumsnet, after its anonymised message boards became a haven for gender-critical feminist debate. Topshop hurriedly introduced gender-neutral changing rooms after being publicly accused of transphobia by a customer barred from the women cubicles. As trans activists pointed out, you may have been trying on clothes next to trans women for years without realising; its just official now, meaning teenagers no longer risk public humiliation just to buy a T-shirt. But what bothers opponents is the idea of changes such as these happening without women consent. Small businesses cant afford to use the exemptions and big companies dont want to, because they dont want to be seen as anti-trans, says Williams. Weve got the law and there is good reason why its there, but the law doesnt mean anything if nobodys using it. Everyones too scared of getting it wrong. Trans men have flown largely beneath the radar of this debate, presumably because men dont feel threatened by sharing changing rooms with potentially female-bodied people. The exception, however, is trans boys. The Oxford meeting also heard from Stephanie Davies-Arai, of the pressure group Transgender Trend, who questions why most transitioning teenagers now referred to Londons specialist Tavistock clinic were born girls when the reverse used to be true: could some have deeper reasons for questioning their gender? (Referrals to the Tavistock, the only NHS gender-identity clinic, rocketed from 97 cases in 2009 to almost 2,600 by the end of last year, and 70% were born female.)     Channel 4 has been exploring the idea that gender identity is a spectrum in The Genderquake. Photograph: Richard Ansett/Channel 4    Its a furiously contested issue, but as a child, Williams says she might have been very attracted to the idea of transitioning. It took me a long time to come to terms with the fact that I was a lesbian. I went through feeling uncomfortable with my gender as a women because I didnt like being a women. I didnt really fit, I didnt feel very good at being a women. I think thats a path lots of lesbians have to tread, and now Im proud to be a lesbian women. But if someone said to me, actually you could be a boy if you wanted Id have found that amazing. However, any suggestion of children being rushed into transitioning, with its echo of 1990s arguments about homosexuality supposedly being promoted in schools, is bitterly contested by those working with young people. It is 12 months before you see a gender doctor, probably 12 months of counselling after that, says Barker. All the kids I see are saying: Its been three years, when am I going to get hormones? Her own hunch, meanwhile, is that the disparities in girls and boys transitioning themselves may even out in later life: Young boys still have the emphasis on toxic masculinity, which means they wont be able to admit theyre trans until theyre older. Its about being able to come to terms with yourself at an early age. And thats a lifetimes work for some. Sitting in the Oxford audience was physics teacher Debbie Hayton, one of the few trans women to have spoken from a womens Places platform. While she agrees the GRA is too bureaucratic, she prefers the security of having a formal diagnosis and surgery to self-identification. As a trans person, I dont want my rights or protections to be based on feelings, because people dont believe it. They may tolerate it. But it takes away my credibility as a trans person. As for all-women shortlists, Hayton says, hell would freeze over before Id go on one, because I was socialised as a boy and I have those advantages still. Such views arent necessarily popular among trans activists, and Hayton has been accused of being self-hating. Yet in a movement focused on giving everyone the freedom to define themselves as they choose, it seems odd to deny her the same leeway.   Related: Labour riven by infighting over gender recognition    For Hayton, sex is a biological fact; she describes herself as male, and I prefer people to relate to me as if I were female. But in an ideal world, free of all stereotypes, what she would have liked is to present as a feminine man. This is really difficult to explain but by asking to be treated by society in the same way that they would treat a women, I feel more comfortable, she says. I transitioned because I couldnt cope with the way society was treating me as a man, the expectations it placed on me, and the restrictions. The problem is, as a teacher, if I express myself completely as non-gendered, I couldnt get on with the job. If somebody comes in saying: Im not a women or a man then every time I did a new class, you would have to go through that with them, when what you really want to be doing is teaching them. Transition was, for her, a pragmatic if not ideal solution to a complex issue. Channel 4 has been exploring the idea that gender identity is a spectrum  stretching from non-binary (identifying with neither gender), to trans, to gay, to a dizzying number of other possibilities, and that finding the right place on it can be complicated, in its reality miniseries Genderquake this week. The programme features 11 young people with different gender identities sharing a house for a month. While an ensuing studio debate between activists, including the trans model Munroe Bergdorf and feminist icon Germaine Greer, descended into chaotic scenes and aggressive audience heckling, the reality show struck a markedly different tone; by the end the housemates had clearly bonded, and in some cases, minds had been changed. Could it be that opinions in real life are less entrenched than public debate suggests? The solutions to some points of conflict are likely, as Jess Phillips says, to be very, very practical. While the Oxford meeting heard poignant stories about schoolgirls feeling unsafe sharing gender-neutral toilets with boys (ironically the meetings venue had unisex toilets), sealed cubicles, locks and other design features may go a long way to avoid any anticipated friction. But finding common ground elsewhere may be trickier, unless both sides can overcome their fear of the other. After deciding not to go to the womens Place meeting, Barker ended up hovering a few yards down the street from the protest, ready to intervene if the chanting students from her university overstepped the mark. I felt for the people who obviously looked nervous going in, because I understand that, she says. Those were the sort of people that I would love to sit down and have a chat with. Perhaps its not too late."
"123""For a brief moment, it seemed as though Stephanie Labb had shattered through the glass ceiling of professional soccer in Canada. But soon after the countrys top ranked female player qualified for a North American mens team, she was told she wouldnt be able to play  because of her gender. It has nothing to do with my ability, the fact that I have proven myself or that a coach has seen me train and believes I can compete in this league, said the goalkeeper. Its some other guys who are just basing it on my gender and thats it.    on the field in 2015.\" width=\"801\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Labb on the field in 2015. Photograph: Icon Sports Wire/Corbis via Getty Images    Since February, the 31-year-old Olympic bronze medallist has been trying out for the Calgary Foothills Soccer Club. The team is part of the Premier Development League, a feeder league in North America. After parting ways with the Washington Spirit soccer club, she had been looking for new ways to keep developing her game. A mens team seemed like the best way to build on the six years she had spent playing in Europe, given that Canada does not have a women professional football league.  I knew that the level of play here is strong. I knew it would challenge me on a daily basis, she told the Guardian.  She had watched other top Canadian athletes blaze a similar trail; the Olympic medallists Hayley Wickenheiser and Shannon Szabados had each played in professional mens hockey leagues, in Europe and the United States, respectively. When she pitched the idea to clubs, several were resistant. But eventually she connected with the Calgary Foothills club, where a technical director said he would take her on as long as she could prove herself during tryouts. So thats exactly what I did, said Labb. And now the league has come back to us and said no. Youre a female and this is a male league. She described the response as shocking and disappointing. I just assumed that we were a little more forward-thinking than that. And that we wouldnt be making these decisions based on gender, she said.  Several of the countrys top athletes soon weighed in, rebuking the league for its position.     Honestly @uslpdl, its 2018, grow some  and think outside the box. If shes good enough, she plays.@stephlabbe  #smallminded #oldschoolbs Hayley Wickenheiser (@wick_22) May 3, 2018    The Premier Development League did not reply to multiple requests for comment from the Guardian. But it has previously defended its stance. Like virtually all of our peer leagues around the world, the PDL has gender-based eligibility requirements, which we applied consistently in this case, the league said in a statement to the Canadian Press. The league said it applauded all that female soccer players had done to push the sport forward in North America. Stephanie Labb, in particular, has had tremendous success, and we wish her the best as she continues to pursue her career goals. Calgarys Foothills Soccer Club said it still considered Labb part of the team but the leagues short season precluded an appeal of the decision. The club is looking into ways around this to support Steph staying, Tommy Wheeldon Jr, the clubs technical director, said in a statement. Based on Stephs ability, she has shown she can play with us.  Labb said she was planning to file a formal challenge of the eligibility requirements ahead of the leagues annual general meeting in December. She continues to train with the team and is hoping to join a European team in the coming months.  Despite the uncertainty now looming over her career, she said she had no regrets about her attempt to join the mens league. It was the best possible opportunity to put myself in an environment thats going to challenge me every day and help me grow, not only as a soccer player but as a person, she said.  She said she had been humbled by the outpouring of support  from team-mates, other Olympians and fans across North America  she had received in the wake of the decision.  I hope it creates change, she added. I hope that this is inspiring young girls and showing them that were not going to stand for this kind of treatment, were not going to stand for a female not being able to compete somewhere because shes a girl."
"124""Australian LGBT organisations have been urged by veterans of the successful Dutch campaign for marriage equality to focus their efforts on achieving social acceptance through better gender and sexuality education. Campaigners from the Netherlands, the first country to legalise same-sex marriage in 2001, interviewed to mark the International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia on Thursday, suggested marriage equality increases social acceptance, but more targeted action is needed to protect LGBT youth. Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon       The director of LGBT rights group COC Nederland, Koen van Dijk, told Guardian Australia that according to official statistics in the Netherlands some 90% of people now have a positive attitude of LGBT people, up from 53% in 2006. In that time the proportion of people who wanted to repeal marriage equality fell from 22% to just 6%. Asked what Australian LGBT organisations should do after marriage equality was legalised in December, Van Dijk said he was sure that in Australia full equality has not yet been reached, citing the fact the Netherlands still has a long way to go on trans and intersex rights. Since marriage equality, weve had to work on equal rights for rainbow families, he said. And we still have to do a lot of work on social acceptance. Van Dijk said the movement in the Netherlands had pushed for compulsory gender and sexuality education in schools and mobilised LGBT youth to improve safety in schools and combat bullying. In Australia the Safe Schools anti-bullying program has struggled, with federal funding lapsing in mid-2017 and New South Wales replacing it with a new anti-bullying program. Although the Victorian government still runs Safe Schools through its education department, the Liberal opposition has vowed to scrap it.    Weve seen a strong mobilisation and increased financing in religious movements to oppose the LGBTI movement  Koen van Dijk     Debate was sparked this week by former prime minister John Howard suggesting the federal government should defund any schools that did not allow parents to remove their children from classes that clashed with their values. The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, brushed off the concern by arguing it was a right parents already possess. Van Dijk said all bullying is bad but LGBT-specific programs are needed because bullying on the grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity is the most common form in the Netherlands and around the world. Its very intrusive, it directly attacks people where they feel very vulnerable, just as they are starting to recognise their own identity, he said. He said that in the Netherlands LGB children are aware they are not straight on average at age 11, but wait three years before telling anyone, meaning for the better part of high school they walk around lonely with a very big secret they feel vulnerable about. Van Dijk said the Netherlands had largely escaped backlash against marriage equality and other attempts to reduce LGBT peoples rights, which he attributed to the fact it was the first country to legalise same-sex marriage and opposition was not yet organised. Weve seen a strong mobilisation and increased financing in religious movements to oppose the LGBTI movement around the world since then, he said.     While legalising same-sex marriage in Australia in 2017 was a watershed, the focus is now on education. Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images    Discrimination and the Ruddock review Although same-sex marriage was legalised in 2001, it took until 2012 before discrimination laws were tightened in the Netherlands to prevent civil celebrants from refusing to conduct same-sex weddings and to remove the right of religious schools to expel students or fire teachers if they expressed that they were of a different sexual orientation. In Australia exemptions to discrimination law that allow religious schools to do this are a central ground of contention in the Ruddock religious freedom review, due to be handed to the government on Friday. Religious groups, including the Catholic church, the Anglican diocese of Sydney and Christian Schools Australia, have fought to retain these powers, while submissions from LGBT rights groups have called for them to be repealed. The Human Rights Watch LGBT advocacy director, Boris Dittrich  a former MP who first proposed marriage equality in the Dutch parliament 1994  said the campaign had concentrated on marriage equality because it was seen as the ultimate form of equality and non-discrimination.     There needs to be a new priority on anti-bullying programs for LGBTI youth  Alex Greenwich     After that, they moved to issues such as the legal status of the female partner of a women who gives birth to a child. Dittrich said people got used to a same-sex couple celebrating their marriage, which helped make LGBT people visible in a positive way. But he noted the same statistics that show the overwhelming majority of people now support marriage equality also show the figures drop when people are asked if it is OK for two men to be seen kissing each other in public. Both Van Dijk and Dittrich said cases of private service providers, like bakers and florists, being sued for refusing to serve same-sex weddings had not materialised, rejecting one of the central arguments for further protection for religious freedom made by conservatives in Australia. Asked how Australia should help strike the balance between religious freedom and the right to non-discrimination, Dittrich said data collection is very important.   Related: Most Australians oppose religious schools' right to fire staff based on sexuality    My suggestion would be to frequently collect cases of discrimination based on religious freedom and based on sexual orientation/gender identity and debate these results, he said. The NSW MP and Australian Marriage Equality co-chair, Alex Greenwich, said this International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia was a really important one because on the back of achieving marriage equality, it again shows how effective the LGBTI community are in making positive change happen  to the law, in their workplaces and local communities. There needs to be a new priority on anti-bullying programs for LGBTI youth, he said. Greenwich said Safe Schools had sought to support LGBT young people and the children of same-sex parents  two groups targeted by the no campaign during the postal survey. The damage of that is still very much real, he said. Governments, state and federal, need to have a renewed focus on what support can be given in schools, especially after the bruising postal survey. The battle for LGBT protections Under Bill Shorten, federal Labor has taken a strong stand against watering down discrimination laws in a way that would allow discrimination against LGBT people, including voting against all the conservatives substantive amendments to the marriage law. But it has not committed to removing existing religious exemptions that allow the firing of LGBT staff or expulsion of students. On Tuesday Shorten equivocated on the future of Safe Schools, noting that the program applied in different states and some of it already exists. The way I approach Safe Schools programs, and indeed other anti-bullying programs, is keeping our kids safe should be paramount, he said. I hear from parents every day their kids are getting bullied at school. The Greens federal LGBT spokeswomen, Janet Rice, said Safe Schools was an incredible example of how education, support and acceptance can positively impact the lives of LGBTIQ young people, and whole school communities.   Related: IDAHOBIT: time to reflect on impact negative reporting has on trans kids | Hannah Mouncey    We need programs like this to provide secular and inclusive support for students, rather than the current chaplains program, which denies LGBTIQ students access to meaningful, unbiased support, she said. In the 2018 budget the Turnbull government extended $247m of funding to the school chaplaincy program over four years, committing to give the program an enhanced focus on addressing bullying in schools. Rice warned that the Ruddock review is a Trojan horse to entrench discrimination that was set up by the far right of the Liberal party intent on attacking LGBTI people in their schools and workplaces. This IDAHOBIT, Im calling on my parliamentary colleagues in the government and the Labor opposition to commit to standing by all LGBTIQ people, and reject any further watering down of protections against discrimination, she said. Australia needs to strengthen anti-discrimination laws, not weaken them."
"125""Cabinet ministers must demand sectors under their remit produce action plans to reduce their gender pay gaps, reporting back within six months, Theresa May has said. The gender pay gap has fallen slightly from 19.8% in 2010 to 18.4% in 2017 but on current projections will not close for another 34 years, the cabinet was told.   Related: One in 10 employers still to report on gender pay gap    Penny Mordaunt, the international development secretary who had taken on the women and equalities brief just 24 hours earlier following the resignation of Amber Rudd, said ministers should ask key sectors covered by their departments what they were doing to close the gap.  Mordaunt said she would report back to the cabinet by November, with ministers expected to feed in from their departments. Speaking to the cabinet, May said the UK should be proud to be one of the first countries in the world to introduce gender pay gap reporting in over 10,000 large companies. All public sector bodies have now reported, Downing Street said, with 97% meeting the deadline. However, the government is understood to have contacted 1,500 companies to demand an explanation as to why they have not complied.  The PM said this has significantly raised the exposure of the issue across the country and is an important first step in driving the cultural change that we need, Mays spokesman said, pointing to the culture shift that the reporting had already precipitated in key employers, such as the BBC. The figures released over the course of the past few months showed eight out of 10 employers pay men more than women. The Equalities and Human Rights Commission is responsible for enforcing the law for companies with over 250 employees to report their pay figures.  However, MPs have recently questioned its capacity to enforce the law given the cuts to the EHRCs funding. The construction sector, which will fall under the new housing, communities and local government secretary James Brokenshires brief, reported the worst average median gender pay gap at 25%. This was followed by finance and insurance at 22%."
"126""Four out of five Australians oppose the right of religious schools to hire and fire staff or expel students because of their sexuality, a new poll has found. The YouGov Galaxy poll, conducted for the LGBTI rights lobby group Just Equal, found that 82% opposed the existing discrimination law exemptions that allowed expulsion of gay and lesbian students and 79% opposed the schools ability to fire teachers if they married a person of the same sex. The poll lends weight to submissions from LGBTI rights groups to the Ruddock religious freedom review, which call for the exemptions to be abolished and adds pressure on Labor to oppose them.  Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning       Religious groups including the Catholic church, Anglican diocese of Sydney and Christian Schools Australia have fought to retain these powers and want them further entrenched by framing them as a positive right to religious freedom rather than as grudging exceptions to discrimination law. The YouGov poll found 78% of respondents opposed religious schools ability to fire transgender staff or expel transgender students.  The same proportion said religious schools should not be entitled to taxpayer funds if they discriminated against staff or students. Two in three Australians  69% of those polled  said discrimination laws should not be changed to allow religious people to refuse service to same-sex marriage.   Related: Marriage equality campaign seeks abolition of religious rights to discriminate    In November, the Guardian Essential poll found narrower opposition to a right for businesses to refuse services to gay weddings, with 48% opposed and 43% in favour. The YouGov poll, conducted from 26 to 29 April, had a sample size of 1,015 and was weighted by age, gender and region to reflect a representative sample of the Australian people. Women were more likely than men to support the right to non-discrimination  more than 80% opposed religious exemptions to discriminate. Marriage equality was legalised in Australia in December after a historic postal survey found 61.6% of respondents in favour of same-sex marriage.     Rodney Croome: We will begin lobbying politicians to tighten up exemptions allowing discrimination against LGBTI people. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian    The Just Equal spokesman Rodney Croome said: Australians emphatically reject discrimination against LGBTI people in the name of religion, even more emphatically than they supported marriage equality. The message to the government and the Labor party is that Australians want less discrimination against LGBTI people in the name of religion, not more.  Armed with these figures, we will begin lobbying politicians to tighten up exemptions allowing discrimination against LGBTI people, not extend them.  In January, the deputy Labor leader, Tanya Plibersek, said Labor had no plans to remove existing religious exemptions that allowed schools to hire and fire staff based on their sexuality. Labors draft platform, ahead of its national conference in July, says it is committed to workplace laws which protect workers against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity and intersex status.   Related: Catholic church says its hiring practices do not discriminate against gay people    It also states it supports the appropriate protection of the religious freedom of all people. Croome said Just Equal would focus on ensuring Labor opposes any retrograde recommendations from the Ruddock inquiry.  Labor should oppose all discrimination against LGBTI people en bloc, and not let its religious caucus override basic principles of equality and fairness, he said. The Ruddock religious freedom review is due to report on 18 May. During the marriage law postal survey campaign, the Catholic church threatened to sack gay teachers, nurses and other staff if they engaged in civil same-sex weddings in breach of church doctrine.   Related: Christian Schools Australia defends right to hire and fire teachers over beliefs    It submitted to the Ruddock review that it did not discriminate against gay staff because they were hired on the same basis as anyone else. That is, staff in a school could reasonably be expected to support the teachings of the particular religion, to not undermine that teaching and to act as role models to their students, it said. The Catholic church said nobody was compelled to work in Catholic schools and, because their religious ethos was widely understood, the powers of religious schools to use discrimination law exemptions when making employment decisions had been used very rarely."
"127""The Victorian government is funding a world-first project to address sexual abuse and violence against women online through a program that will train people to call out sexism and aggression on the internet. The project is an alliance between a number of domestic violence and women advocacy organisations including Gender Equity Victoria, Domestic Violence Victoria and women Health Victoria.  Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon        Last year the UN special rapporteur on the promotion of freedom of expression, David Kaye, said online gender-based abuse and violence are undeniably a scourge, and governments and companies should be taking action against it. But Gender Equity Victorias manager, Jacinta Masters, said governments had not known where to start to tackle online violence against women. For a long time the internet has been seen as too big or too overwhelming, she said.   Related: Facebook's violently sexist pages are an opportunity for feminists | Emer O'Toole    But it is imperative we make sure women voices arent silenced. We hope this project will particularly strengthen the voices of women from LGBTIQ and migrant and refugee communities, as well as the voices of women who dont conform to dominant ideas of femininity, because we know theyre the ones who are so often targeted and silenced. A lot has been done in workplaces to tackle sexism but these methods havent really been trialled before on social media. Masters said women were tired of waiting for major social media platforms like Facebook, Reddit and Twitter to address the targeting of female users and stamp out pages and users promoting revenge porn and misogyny.  The project being led by Gender Equity Victoria will work with moderators at media organisations to help them understand the gendered nature of violence. But a major part of the initiative, Masters said, would be empowering online bystanders to speak up and call out sexism. We want ethical internet users to, when we see abuse online, to feel able to intervene, she said. This project is about supporting people who believe in equality and respect towards women to get behind and support women who receive online abuse. Often bystanders feel ill-equipped to do this or are worried about saying the wrong thing, so we will support those people to get the skills they need.   Related: Twitter not protecting women from abuse, says Amnesty    Victorias minister for women and minister for the prevention of family violence, Natalie Hutchins, on Thursday announced $400,000 in funding for Gender Equity Victoria, and a further $114,000 for the Active Bystander project.  We need to take the lead from brave women who call out sexism and sexual harassment online, and ensure those who speak out are supported, Hutchins told Guardian Australia. This project is a significant step in addressing the sexist commentary which women continue to endure online. An Amnesty International report published in March found 9% of 1,100 British women surveyed thought Twitter was doing enough to stop violence and abuse against women, while 78% felt that sharing their opinion would lead to being targeted with abuse. Amnesty found women reported stress, anxiety and panic attacks as a result of these harmful online experiences.  Guardian Australia is a partner in the Active Bystander project"
"128""For the third Friday in a row, journalists working for Spains public broadcaster have worn black on screen to protest against alleged political interference, gender bias and unequal pay. 
The campaign, known as viernes negro (black Friday), is intended to highlight the Spanish governments continuing refusal to approve a transparent process to appoint an independent board at RTVE.  
Protesters argue that the ruling conservative Peoples party (PP) meddles in media coverage and has a vested interest in appointing the RTVE chair directly.  
For the third consecutive week, RTVE workers are wearing black this Friday to protest against the parliamentary impasse that is hindering the establishment of a public competition to choose the leadership team and restore RTVEs professional judgment, the group RTVE Women said in a statement. 
This struggle, which aims to get RTVE offering diverse, quality and independent information, is one that concerns all of us  including the average citizen whose taxes pay for the production and distribution of RTVE content. 
Journalists have been using the hashtag #AsiSeManipula (#ThisIsHowTheyManipulate) to share their experiences of bias and the pressure placed on them to report certain stories in certain ways. 
On Tuesday, an RTVE editor resigned after her TV channel failed to run a video in which a government aide was caught criticising protesting pensioners. The aide said: How Id love to give them the finger and tell them to go fuck themselves. 
The broadcaster also made headlines in November after it used the theme music from the horror film The Exorcist to accompany a clip featuring the deposed Catalan president Carles Puigdemont. 
Six years ago, a number of RTVE journalists were allegedly purged from the broadcaster for questioning PPs austerity measures. RTVEs current chair, Jos Antonio Snchez, has been accused of pro-PP bias.  
RTVE Women has called on the public to join the campaign by posting photos of themselves dressed in black under the hashtag #BlackFriday3. It also urging people to use the hashtag #DontChangeChannel, in response to the Spanish finance ministers recent suggestion that people could simply switch channels if they didnt like RTVEs coverage. 
Campaigners are hoping to harness the momentum generated by Spains recent feminist strike, in which about 5 million women participated, and the public outcry over a courts decision to clear five men of the gang-rape of a teenager. Male journalists are also backing the cause. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
We suffer the consequences of sexism  the glass ceiling; the pay gap  and were not prepared to keep working under unequal conditions, RTVE Women said. Its about justice and were convinced that, when it comes to a job that needs to be socially responsible, our view offers a less partial view of reality. 
RTVE said it would not comment on the campaign or accusations of bias. "
"129""It began as a call to arms to women in Spain after last weeks incendiary acquittal of five men on rape charges in Pamplona.  We must tell of the aggressions, the violations, compaeras, the journalist Cristina Fallars tweeted, urging her followers to speak out over sexual violence using the hashtag #Cuntalo. But across the Atlantic the message was also received loud and clear, with hundreds of thousands of Latin American women seizing on the Twitter campaign to denounce the rampant gender violence blighting their region and their lives. Each day 12 Latin American women are victims of femicide, according to the UNs Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. From Buenos Aires to Bogot, often horrific accounts of abuse rained in as word of the hashtag  which roughly translates as tell your story  spread. Argentinas Clarn newspaper said more than 430,000 tweets featuring #Cuntalo were posted in one day alone.  #Cuentalo is tearing my soul into a thousand pieces ... Each story tells me we must carry on fighting for women, tweeted Paula Andrea, a Colombian model.  Some chose to use the Spanish-language initiative to recount their own experiences.  One night my ex-husband wanted to have sex when I didnt. To avoid being raped, I locked myself out on the balcony and spent the whole night there without my kids noticing, tweeted Ana Alonso Ferrer from Cuenca, Ecuadors third largest city. Many, though, chose to tell the stories of women who had been robbed of their voices  friends, relatives or strangers lost to a seemingly unstoppable wave of deadly violence against Latin American women.  My husband shot me in the head, wrapped up my body and threw it in the Potrerillos Dam, tweeted a women in Argentina, channeling the voice of one recent murder victim there. Im the one telling you because Concepcin Arregui cannot. Karla Hernndez, a politician in El Salvador who has campaigned against femicide, used the hashtag to highlight the case of a female police officer thought to have been shot and disappeared by fellow officers last December. My family are still waiting. They dont know if Im dead or alive, Hernandez wrote, adding: Im telling you because Carla Ayala cant.  In a 271-character post Ana Lara Vargas, a human rights lawyer and activist from the Mexican state of Hidalgo, remembered Jessica Gonzlez Mandujano, a 31-year-old mother of three who she said had been killed by her abusive husband in 2014. Im telling the story since Jessica is gone, she wrote.   o Paulo after the gang rape of a 16-year-old girl in 2016\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Protesters in So Paulo after the gang rape of a 16-year-old girl in 2016. Photograph: Xinhua/Barcroft Images    Vargas, part of the Colectiva de Mujeres Contra La Violencia group, said she believed #Cuntalo could help revive the experiences of forgotten Latin American women. This hashtag is a really important way of telling these stories ... The campaign is a chance to give voice to those women who have neither access to justice nor the means to share their stories, she said.  The urgency of the campaign in Latin America was underscored by a violent attack on a young Chilean women by five men on Sunday that has been compared to the attack in Spain which inspired #Cuntalo.  Erika Guevara-Rosas, Amnesty Internationals Americas director, said she was not surprised the initiative  which follows 2016s #NiUnaMenos (not one less) movement  had struck a chord in a region with such high rates of violence against women.  Latin America and the Caribbean remains one of the most violent regions with regards to girls and women rights in general. Fourteen of the 25 countries with the highest rates of femicide are here in the region including countries such as Mexico, which tops the list, Central American countries like Nicaragua, Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras, and Argentina and Brazil. It is something that is endemic, she said.  But femicide was only the most radical expression of discrimination and violence against women in a region notorious for machismo, Guevara-Rosas added. It is also home to six of the eight countries with blanket bans on abortion, for example. Faced with staggering violence and almost total impunity, society was finding its voice: Online and offline, people are mobilising, she said.  Vargas, the Mexican activist, said she hoped #Cuntalo would both highlight widespread violence and boost her campaign to secure justice for Mandujano, one of 19 cases of femicide in Hidalgo in 2014.  Vargas recalled how in July that year, after years of savage beatings, Mandujano fled her husband after reporting him to authorities. But on 14 August 2014 he tracked her down to a safe house in the city of Pachuca and shot both her and her brother dead.  Four years have passed and they havent detained him, Vargas complained. The feminicida is still at large."
"130""New laws should be considered to stop non-disclosure agreements being used to silence the victims of sexual harassment and punish those who abuse their power, a former Conservative cabinet minister has&#xa0;said. Nicky Morgan, the former education secretary and women minister, said the time had come to ask if new powers were needed to tackle harassment as part of Theresa Mays pledge to tackle the burning injustices in&#xa0;Britain. It follows a series of scandals that have hit Hollywood, Westminster and other institutions. Film mogul Harvey Weinstein was toppled by a string of allegations, while two cabinet ministers also lost their jobs over inappropriate behaviour. Other MPs are still facing allegations. Meanwhile, the Nobel prize for literature has been postponed this year in the wake of sexual assault allegations connected to the Swedish Academy, which awards the prize. Writing as part of a new cross-party essay collection on injustice, published by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation charity and the Bright Blue thinktank, Morgan said women in Britain still face unjustifiable&#xa0;barriers. The Office for National Statistics Crime Survey for 2016-17 showed that one in five women in the UK has experienced some kind of sexual assault, she writes. In England and Wales, in 2015-16, there were 4,094 sex discrimination cases taken to an employment tribunal. And, horrifically, in spite of a long list of criminal offences outlawing domestic violence, two women a week are killed by their current or former partners in England and Wales. Laws have been passed to clamp down on sexual harassment, abuse and stalking, yet projects such as Everyday Sexism record the deliberate and casual misogyny which girls and women still have to put up with. In many cases, harassment happens because powerful men take advantage of their status to harass women they work with. Is it time for an abuse of power offence? Could whistleblowing protections be extended to those who call out harassment? Should non-disclosure agreements in such situations be outlawed? A series of allegations made against MPs has seen Westminster caught up in the issue. Charlie Elphicke, the Tory MP for Dover and Deal, was suspended from the Conservative party in November and was interviewed under caution by police in March after allegations of sex offences. He denies the claims. Michael Fallon resigned as defence secretary last November after admitting his past behaviour had fallen short. Damian Green lost his job as first secretary after admitting he lied about the fact that pornogrpahic images were found on his Commons computer. Meanwhile, the speaker John Bercow is facing allegations that he bullied members of his staff  an allegation he denies. In her essay, Morgan calls on her party to champion equality and warns it against being suspicious of calls for equality of outcome. Even now, this Conservative government is proposing that the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, which includes sections on equality and prohibiting all forms of discrimination, does not need to continue to be an explicit part of UK law after Brexit, she writes. Gender discrimination starts early. So, there must be a more explicit focus on it within the education system. In the same way that we need more male primary school teachers, we need more female head teachers: more flexible working patterns in our schools and colleges is essential. She also calls for more rights for women going through the menopause. Many health conditions faced by women now, happily, attract fierce attention and widespread support. Breast cancer, for example, receives significant levels of funding. But there are still issues  for example, early screening for ovarian cancer or tackling the taboos around the menopause  which need greater focus. Every women goes through the menopause, but are affected differently, some very negatively. Women should not have to face inconsistent support from employers during what can be a very difficult time."
"131""Peter Dutton has called for the entrenchment of religious freedoms, including the right of religious schools to sack gay teachers, and for parents to withdraw their children from the anti-LGBTI bullying program Safe Schools. The home affairs minister made the comments on Friday as the Ruddock religious freedom review delivered its final report to the government. On Friday the Courier Mail reported that the review would recommend a federal law to prevent discrimination against a person on the grounds of religion  which laws in some states already do. The LGBTI advocate and Just Equal spokesman Rodney Croome welcomed that recommendation but warned against any move to allow discrimination in the name of religion. He called on the government to release the report.  Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon        In a statement, Malcolm Turnbull thanked the former attorney general Philip Ruddock and the other panel members for their work examining whether Australian law adequately protects the human right to freedom of religion. Turnbull said he would consult members of the government before releasing the reports findings, passing the job of the governments response to the attorney general, Christian Porter.  At a doorstop in Gatton, Queensland, Turnbull said the review would be released shortly and promised that the government was absolutely committed to ensuring that freedom of religion is protected in Australia. Dutton told Sky News the government needed to consider protections for people who send their children to a particular school, to an independent school, to a Catholic school ... whatever it might be, a Jewish school an Islamic school, whatever, that there is the ability for that curriculum to be taught in accord with that religious belief.   Related: Christian Schools Australia defends right to hire and fire teachers over beliefs    Debate was sparked this week by the former prime minister John Howard suggesting the federal government should defund any schools that did not allow parents to remove their children from classes that clashed with their values. Turnbull brushed off the concern by arguing it was a right parents already possessed. Dutton said that it should be within the law for teachers to be employed at that school that share that religious belief, not a contrary view, and I think there needs to be similar protections put in place.  Thats at the heart of the concerns that many people share, he said.  I think there are many within the Labor party who would share a similar view, and I would expect Bill Shorten to offer bipartisan support to sensible reform in this way, but lets wait and see what the review has to offer and what the response might be.   Related: Human rights commissioner Ed Santow on religious freedom: 'It's about potential conflicts'    Discrimination laws contain exemptions that allow religious institutions, including schools, to hire and fire staff based on their sexuality. During the Ruddock review, religious groups  including the Catholic church, the Anglican diocese of Sydney and Christian Schools Australia  have fought to retain these powers, while submissions from LGBTI rights groups have called for them to be repealed. Under Shorten, federal Labor has taken a strong stand against watering down discrimination laws in a way that would allow discrimination against LGBTI people, including voting against all the conservatives substantive amendments to the marriage law. But it has not committed to removing existing religious exemptions. Asked whether an Islamic group should be able to advocate corporal punishment of a married women under sharia law, Dutton said he wouldnt support any religion preaching something outside Australian law.   Related: Marriage equality campaign seeks abolition of religious rights to discriminate    He said parents had the right to teach and guide their children as they see fit ... but protections dont extend to providing protection for practices which are outside of the law. Similarly for people that have a parental responsibility that dont want their kids to be taught a Safe Schools program in some schools within Victoria, for example. The government had refused to extend federal funding for Safe Schools beyond mid-2017. In the 2018 budget, it extended $247m of funding to the school chaplaincy program over four years, committing to give it an enhanced focus on addressing bullying in schools. On Thursday, the International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia, the director of LGBT rights group COC Nederland, Koen van Dijk, urged Australia to reinstitute LGBT-specific anti-bullying programs because bullying on the grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity is the most common form in the Netherlands and around the world."
"132""Women using Chinas largest ride-hailing platform, Didi Chuxing, are changing their profile photos after the death of a female passenger and revelations that drivers have been reviewing female users based on their appearance. Last week Didi apologised and closed its ride-sharing service, Hitch, after a 21-year-old women was found dead, half naked with more than 20 stab wounds, in the central Chinese city of Zhengzhou. Police suspected her driver, a 27-year-old man whose body was found in a river in the same city at the weekend. Didi said the man had stolen the profile of his father to use the app.   Related: China: security guards assault women attending LGBT event    On Weibo, women have begun posting new profile photos that range from pictures of male relatives and stock photos found online to images of Thanos, a villain in Marvels Avengers series. Many changed their listed gender to male. Hitch, a cheaper carpool service, is one of Didis most used services.  A 20-year-old university student in Sichuan identified only by the surname Wang said her mother asked that she change her picture. Wangs profile, previously a photo of her standing demurely by the word Gal painted on a wall, now features a heavily tattooed young man. Most of her friends have changed their profiles too. Others have been advised by their parents to take self-defence classes. Chinese media have reported that a little-known function on the ride-sharing app allowed drivers to leave comments visible to other drivers about passengers. Tags include descriptions like goddess or natural beauty. Wang said that drivers left reviews describing her as sweet looking. One driver reviewed a female passenger as long legged and hot as hell, according to Caixin, a Chinese financial news publication. The incident reflects persistent sexism toward female commuters in Chinas cities. After the Hitch incident, Chinas state-owned broadcaster CCTV issued advice for women using ride-hailing apps. In a brochure including an image of a women in high heels and rolling a small suitcase while hailing a cab, authorities advised women not to take a car late at night, to remote or unfamiliar places, or alone. The ad also advised women not to chat too much with drivers. Didi said in its statement last week it would review its operations and the identities of its drivers. It has not said anything about the reviews of passengers based on their appearance. The company did not respond to requests for comment from the Guardian. After the accident, there are many people sharing their bad experiences using Didi and it seems that Didi hasnt responded to those complaints, Wang said. Additional reporting by Wang Xueying"
"133""In the grandeur of St Pauls Cathedral, far removed from the busy hospital wards where she once worked as a nurse, Sarah Mullally made history on Saturday when she was installed as the bishop of London, becoming the most senior female cleric ever in the Church of England. The 90-minute ceremony  on the birthday of Florence Nightingale  marked a break with tradition in more than just gender. The 133rd bishop of London is also a former comprehensive school pupil whose career before she was ordained as a priest at the age of 40 was in the NHS. There arent many bishops who come from comprehensive schools, who are poly [polytechnic] girls and who did [part-time training] for the priesthood, she told the Observer in an interview before the service. Its not just gender, its also your background thats equally important. Some of these things are changing. Leadership in the church needs to reflect the communities we serve. There is work to do about how we encourage vocations from people who may be working-class, people whove not had a traditional straightforward academic pathway, people from BAME [black, Asian and minority ethnic] groups. The system may need to be different. The appointment of Mullally, 56, to the No&#xa0;3 position in the church after the archbishops of Canterbury and York surprised many who believed the capitals strong conservative traditions ruled out a female bishop. Mullally will also become the first bishop of London to ordain male and female priests; her predecessor, Richard Chartres, declined to ordain either in order to avoid a backlash from traditionalists. Since her appointment was announced in December, Mullally has met clergy and congregations who for theological reasons will not accept my ministry, she said. While I havent spoken to everyone  and a lot of people may have chosen not to speak to me  I have been encouraged about how its gone; theyve been very&#xa0;generous. Someone at a school asked me if a refusal to accept my ministry was perpetuating inequality. My answer is, there is a tension; to deny that would be wrong. My challenge [to traditionalists] is to ask: how are you encouraging women in your church, how are you making sure youre not discriminating against them? But I respect those who cant accept my position, and we will make provision for those who for theological reasons do not want to be ordained by me because I am a women. Later this month Mullally will take a seat in the House of Lords that is hers by right as bishop of London. Its a real privilege, and I recognise I need to use it wisely, she said. She hopes to focus on three areas: London issues, health and nursing, and speaking up for marginalised groups: women, the homeless, young people  its a tough world for them. She added: I hope to give a voice to women who, for whatever reason, feel marginalised. And to ask what I can do to encourage and empower women to do the best they can  perhaps by mentoring, which she has done throughout her career. Mullally rose swiftly through the NHS ranks to become the youngest ever chief nursing officer at the age of 37. My experience in the NHS and Department of Health has shaped how I minister. Being a nurse is incredibly pastoral, and I bring that with me, but Ive also managed complex organisations and provided leadership for 420,000 nurses. I think Ive learned something about leadership, that you have to understand the value of people, and be clear about what the vision is and how it can be achieved, and bring people with you. Christians often found it very hard to talk openly about faith in the workplace, she said. You have to have confidence and not be apologetic  and thats quite hard in what is a hostile and increasingly secular world. But if you are confident and respectful, people are interested. What they find difficult is if they think youre being directional to them. She was aware that there are groups with whom the church hasnt got huge amounts of traction, and young people are one of them. We need to reach out, engage with young people, knowing that the church will look different as a result. Im struck that young people may not be interested in the church, but they are interested in God. They dont necessarily want us to give them the answers, but they want to engage with the&#xa0;questions.    All bishops are now trained on how to deal with [abuse] disclosures, every diocese has had an independent review  Sarah Mullally     On LGBT equality and same-sex marriage, a controversial issue within the church, Mullally supports its official position that marriage is between a man and a women, but that LGBT people should be embraced and valued. She is part of a process set up by the archbishops to examine the issue of sexuality. I understand why people might feel its kicking it into the long grass, but I certainly hope thats not the case, she said. The other crisis issue within the church is sexual abuse. Mullally extended a personal invitation to one survivor, Gilo (also known as Joe), in whose case she has been closely involved, to attend her installation. He declined, telling the Observer he was disappointed and frustrated with the slow pace of change on how the church deals with abuse cases. I know Gilo thinks I havent delivered, said Mullally. But we shouldnt underestimate what happened [in the two years since an independent report into his case]. There have been changes  all bishops are now trained on how to deal with disclosures, every diocese has had an independent safeguarding review. But I understand Gilo doesnt think weve gone far enough. A key demand from survivors is for claims of abuse to be dealt with by an independent body. Mullally said: I think its right to ask the question are we independent enough?, but part of the change of culture is that people like myself have taken responsibility for providing a safe environment and, if someone discloses to us, dealing with it appropriately. We have to take responsibility; we cant hand everything over. She hopes that her appointment is part of a continuing process of women&#xa0;taking more leadership roles in the church  perhaps also as archbishops when those positions become vacant. The challenge is that people often think that, once youve appointed a women, youve dealt with the issue. You havent. In London we still have a job to do, to enable women to lead big churches, become area deans and archdeacons. Theres still work to do around how you change the culture."
"134""Facebook is blocking all foreign spending on advertising around Irelands upcoming referendum on abortion in an effort to adhere to the principles of the countrys election spending laws.  With just over two weeks to go until the 25 May vote on liberalising Irelands strict abortion laws, Facebook announced it would restrict advertising to organisations and people based in the Republic. The move follows accusations that attempts have been made to swing votes across the world through foreign-funded campaigns and so-called astroturfing. This is an issue we have been thinking about for some time, Facebook said. Today, as part of our efforts to help protect the integrity of elections and referendums from undue influence, we will begin rejecting ads related to the referendum if they are being run by advertisers based outside of Ireland. As part of the process, Ireland has also became the first country outside the US to receive a set of advertiser-transparency tools Facebook promised in early in April. Our view ads feature  which enables Irish Facebook users to see all of the ads any advertiser is running on Facebook in Ireland at the same time  has been fast tracked and is operational today, the company said. Abortion has long been a divisive issue in Ireland. Voters will be asked whether they want to repeal article 40.3.3  known as the eighth amendment  which enshrined a ban on abortion in the Irish constitution in 1983.   Related: Ireland sets May date for historic abortion referendum    Facebook said other features promised last month have also been fast-tracked in order to launch them in the run-up to the vote. What we are now doing for the referendum on the eighth amendment will allow us to operate as though these tools, which are not yet fully available, were in place today with respect to foreign referendum-related advertising, it said. The delay in launching the feature, and the short time left in the campaign, led to criticism of the company.  Facebook are always late to the party, said Gavin Sheridan, an Irish social media expert who has been following the digital side of the referendum campaign. They were late with Russian interference in the US election  All their announcements seem designed to stave off regulation, and for me it boils down to do we allow them to self-regulate, or do we regulate ourselves. Facebook said it would be working directly with political parties and campaign groups on both sides of the vote, who are being asked to notify the company if they have concerns about ad campaigns. It added: We will then assess and act on those reports. We will also be using machine learning to help us with this effort to identify ads that should no longer be running. Irish law bars foreign money from going to political parties and registered campaigns. But the legislation does not cover money spent directly on digital advertising, a loophole that observers say has been exploited by groups overseas wishing to influence the vote. The Transparent Referendum Initiative has been tracking online advertising around the vote. Two weeks ago Liz Carolan, its founder, said her group had picked up 144 different pages paying for ads at one point in time over the last few months.  As for who is paying for those ads, said Sheridan, the only people who know that for certain are Facebook themselves. He and Carolan welcomed Facebooks move and pointed out that Google and its subsidiary YouTube had yet to make any similar commitment. We are receiving large numbers of screengrabs indicating spend on advertising on these platforms happening under the radar, Carolan said. Yet we have even less information on these advertisements than we do on Facebook ads."
"135""Dublins Dail will now have to give legislative form to the people of the Irish Republics overwhelming decision to repeal the eighth amendment (Ireland votes by landslide to legalise abortion, Report, 26 May, theguardian.com). Belfasts Stormont will now have to&#xa0;consider what it will do to resolve&#xa0;the fundamental contradiction it faces. The largest nationalist party, Sinn Fin, supported the yes vote in the Republic so can presumably be expected to be consistent and to support a similar development in the north. The largest loyalist party, the Democratic Unionist party, has always been selective in its loyalty to the United Kingdom. On the one hand, it supports leave against the six counties majority for remain because of the UK majority. On the other, it resists the application to the region of the UKs 1967 Abortion Act despite our joint nations absolute&#xa0;majority in support of it. We, across the whole UK, must now&#xa0;take up the case for the improvement to the 1967 Act, such as the decriminalisation of abortion as the Irish Republic is considering, and the extension of a civilised availability to women of the right to choose to all parts of our nation.Mary PimmLondon  Ireland has come of age by voting in such a stunning way to repeal the eighth amendment. However, lets not forget that true freedom for Irish women has been a very long time coming. In the 1916 Easter Rising, Constance Markievicz fought for gender equality based partly upon her belief in socialist republicanism. She was soon marginalised by other, deeply socially conservative, Irish rebels. They even denied her a state funeral when she died in 1927. After independence, many of the same male revolutionaries who defeated the British empire also colluded with the Catholic church to impose harsh social repression on Irish women. amon de Valera famously proclaimed Ireland to be a Catholic nation; Catholic doctrine was embedded in the 1937 constitution. With this overwhelming vote, the Irish people have taken a massive, historic step towards finally making Markieviczs egalitarian vision for Irelands women a reality.Joe McCarthyDublin  It is a disgrace that in the 21st century women are not comfortably able to choose at which stage in their lives they might prefer to have children  or not. The antiquated underpinnings of centuries of masculine economic dogma mean that women choices are subservient to absurd economic compulsions, whereas it should be clear by now that women, as the primary sex, have the greatest creative investment in society. Without them our species would be extinct within a century. Of course women must have the right to choose on abortion. But they are not there to be the slaves of constant economic and social coercion  money, jobs, unemployment, impossible property ladders, mortgages, or the need to be able to afford a family, for goodness sake. Women are needed to recivilise the outmoded thinking of much of our solely masculine outlook. They must be accorded, as of right, not only equal pay and opportunity but, even more importantly and for the first time in history, the voices, insights, powers and attention to shape the principles, institutions, behaviour, practices and assumptions that we are made to live by: generally male-made, frequently archaic, and too often disastrous for many. Women must now be heard as they have never been heard before. Otherwise much of the rubbish will continue.Ian FlintoffOxford  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"136""The landslide in favour of liberalising Irelands abortion regime will put pressure on politicians in Northern Ireland to review its highly restrictive laws, though one insisted the region would not be bullied into accepting abortion on demand. 
Repeal of the eighth amendment, to be followed by legislation to permit abortion on request up to the 12th week of pregnancy, means Northern Ireland will be the only place in the UK and Ireland  and most of Europe  where terminations are outlawed apart from in the most exceptional circumstances. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
UK politicians acknowledged that Northern Ireland would come under the spotlight. 
The Labour MP Stella Creasy said she would be asking colleagues in Westminster to back legislation to bring the UKs abortion laws into the 21st century and to make sure all our citizens are given equal access to their reproductive rights. 
She added: We cannot let Northern Irish women be left behind. 
Penny Mordaunt, the international development secretary who also holds the equality brief, tweeted:  
 
 
  Based on the exit poll, a historic &amp; great day for Ireland, &amp; a hopeful one for Northern Ireland. That hope must be met. #HomeToVote stories are a powerful and moving testimony as to why this had to happen and that understanding &amp; empathy exists between generations. #trustwomen Penny Mordaunt MP (@PennyMordaunt) 
  May 25, 2018
  
 
Owen Smith, the former shadow Northern Ireland secretary, tweeted: 
 
 
  Wonderful news, if true. And a powerful message to Northern Ireland. We need change across the whole island of Ireland. Owen Smith (@OwenSmith_MP) 
  May 25, 2018
  
 
Naomi Long, leader of Northern Irelands Alliance party, tweeted: 
 
 
  If exit polls are right this is an incredible result for #together4yes #repealthe8thEyes will now turn to us: yet again a place apart. Behind GB. Behind Ireland.Thoughts with @MrsEtoB &amp; others still waiting change here. #trustNIwomentooNaomi Long MLA (@naomi_long) 
  May 25, 2018
  
 
But the Democratic Unionist MP Ian Paisley insisted that Northern Ireland should not be bullied into accepting abortion on demand.  
Pointing out there was no constitutional lock on abortion in Northern Ireland, he tweeted: The settled will of the people has been to afford protections to the unborn life and protect the life of the mother. 
Referring to what he called the foaming at the mouth idiocy of some commentators, he added: On Abortion NI has had a settled cross-party view on this for decades. Nothing suggests it has changed. 
The outcome of Irelands referendum also raises the prospect of Northern Irish women needing an abortion making a considerably easier journey south for the procedure. 
In 2016 more than 700 women from Northern Ireland crossed the Irish Sea to clinics in Britain to terminate pregnancies. 
Earlier this year, Marie Stopes clinics said they had conducted 363 terminations for Northern Irish women in England between 30 June 2017 and 28 February this year, while the British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS) carried out 190. 
Colm OGorman, of Amnesty International Ireland, told BBC Radio 4s Today programme: Almost three-quarters of people in Northern Ireland want to see significantly expanded access to abortion. Its entirely unacceptable that women and girls still have to travel  for abortions. 
Clare Murphy of BPAS said: For decades, Irish women have been forced to travel hundreds of miles to our clinics in England, often alone, at a huge personal and emotional cost.The result, once confirmed, means that the Irish government can bring an end to this suffering, and legislate to provide the care women need at home. Now more than ever it is time for the UK government to show the same respect for the women of Northern Ireland. 
 
  
  
   
    
    Abortion will not immediately be available to women within Ireland.
    The eighth amendment  article 40.3.3 of the Irish constitution  which prohibited abortion, will be replaced with a clause stating: Provision may be made by law for the regulation of termination of pregnancy.
    The Irish government is planning to bring legislation before the Dil, providing for abortion on request up to the 12th week of pregnancy, with a three-day cooling off period before medication is administered.
    The prime minister, Leo Varadkar, said he wanted the new law to be enacted by the end of the year.
    Between 12 and 24 weeks, abortion will be available only in cases of fatal foetal abnormality, a risk to a womens life or a risk of serious harm to the health of the mother. After 24 weeks, termination will be possible in cases of fatal foetal abnormality.
    There will be provision for conscientious objection among medical practitioners, although doctors will be obliged to transfer care of the pregnant women to another doctor.
    
   
  
  
 
The 1967 Abortion Act was never extended to Northern Ireland, and abortion remains illegal unless the life or mental health of the mother is at risk. Northern Ireland has the harshest criminal penalty for abortion anywhere in Europe; in theory, life imprisonment can be handed down to a women undergoing an unlawful abortion. 
Most politicians in Northern Ireland do not favour reform on abortion. The issue crosses traditional divides, with support for the current highly restrictive regime among both Catholic and Protestant politicians. 
In February, the UN said the UK was violating the rights of women in Northern Ireland by restricting their access to abortion, exposing them to horrific situations. 
Its committee on the elimination of discrimination against women said thousands of women and girls faced systematic violations of rights through being compelled to either travel outside Northern Ireland to procure a legal abortion or to carry their pregnancy to term. 
Last month, Belfast city council passed a motion condemning the arrest and attempted prosecution of women in Northern Ireland who procure abortion pills online. 
The motion denounced cases such as the one involving a mother who obtained abortion pills for her 15-year-old daughter after her child was raped. The mother is facing prosecution. 
Northern Ireland is also the only place in the UK and Ireland that has not legislated to allow same-sex marriages. Campaigners for LGBT and gender rights are expected to step up campaigns for change in the coming months."
"137"" 
  6.53pm BST  
  
  The map shows the breakdown of results: an overwhelming yes to repealing the eighth. 
  That brings our live coverage to an end. Thanks for reading and commenting. 
  Our full report on todays historic result is here. 
  Yes campaign with twice the number of votes cast for No\"> 
   With a turnout of 64.1%, all but one constituency voted in favour of the Yes campaign with twice the number of votes cast for No 
   
  
 
 
  6.34pm BST  
  
  Thats it then: as those two shock exit polls predicted last night, by a margin of 66.4% for yes to 33.6% for no and on a record turnout of 64.51%, Ireland has voted to repeal the eighth amendment of its constitution, which since 1983 has effectively prohibited abortion in all bar exceptional circumstances. 
  Heres is Guardian Ireland correspondent Henry McDonalds full story on the events of a historic day, what led up to them, and what they might mean.  
  Here is Harriet Sherwoods explanation of what will happen to Irelands abortion legislation now, and how the governments planned new regime compares with the rest of the world. 
  And here is her article about how the spotlight in the abortion debate is now likely to switch to Northern Ireland. 
  
 Updated at 6.46pm BST 
 
 
  6.25pm BST  
  
  The final three results have been confirmed, and as expected Donegal was the only one of Irelands 40 constituencies to vote no: 
   
   Sligo-Leitrim 59.38% yes, 40.62% no 
   Cork East 64.12% yes, 35.88% no 
   Donegal 51.87% no, 48.13% yes 
   
   
   
    Just one of Ireland's 40 constituencies has voted against repeal -- Donegal. And even there, the vote was very close, just 2,532 ballots. 52% to 48% Emma Graham-Harrison (@_EmmaGH) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 6.25pm BST 
 
 
  6.23pm BST  
  
  My colleague at Dublin Castle Emma Graham-Harrison tells me that as the results were announced, the crowds in the courtyard began chanting, Savita, Savita! - the name of the Indian dentist who died of sepsis in 2012 after being refused an abortion during a protracted miscarriage. 
  
 Updated at 6.31pm BST 
 
 
  6.17pm BST  
 Eighth amendment repealed 
  
  Here we are, the final result. Returning officer Barry Ryan is announcing the result: 
  Yes: 1,429,981 NO: 723,632 
  A majority of 706,349 for yes 
  Thats 66.4% for yes, and 33.6% for no 
  Irelands eighth amendment has therefore been repealed. 
  
 Updated at 6.19pm BST 
 
 
  6.08pm BST  
  
  So while were all waiting patiently for the final result  its been an hour-and-a-half since the last constituency declared  it seems at least someone in the crowd at Dublin Castle has a nice sense of humour: 
   
   
    Shout out to the legendary ladies giving out thematically appropriate After Eights at Dublin Castle! #RepealThe8th pic.twitter.com/SKxbh5bz1t Jason  Vote Yes  (@jtlnrj) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 6.16pm BST 
 
 
  6.04pm BST  
  
  Readers have been telling the Guardian about what they hope will happen next.  
  Katie, film-maker: 
   
   For both sides, this is a very difficult and emotional topic and I hope that people can be gentle and empathetic with each other. I hope that women are treated with respect. I hope that women are given compassion. I hope that women are given the ability to make the extremely difficult and painful decision about an unplanned pregnancy without needing to feel shame or facing barriers. I hope that women are given the option to have quality medical advice and facilities if they so choose. 
   
  Lloyd Meadhbh Houston, student: 
   
   In the short term, I hope that this result will improve the lives of women in Ireland and Northern Ireland, allowing access to free, safe, and legal terminations to women in the south, and a shorter, more manageable journey for women in the North. In the long term, I believe this result offers further evidence of the absurdity, hypocrisy, and cruelty of the prohibition of abortion in the North of Ireland. 26 counties down, six to go. The fight isnt over. 
   
  Louse Kinsella, mother: 
   
   I hope the government will put in place legislation, with sufficient financial supports and recruitment to support the proposals. I also hope that there will be sufficient supports and education put in place with a target of Ireland having the lowest abortion rate in the world. Abortion should always be the last resort and I think targeting a very low rate through proper eduction and empowerment of women, men, and children combined with proper healthcare and social supports is something both sides of this campaign can support.  
   
  Robert McCourt, retired: 
   
   I think the government will move quickly to enshrine the result into law. I think it is necessary for society to build upon this result and that the people who voted no can be encouraged to understand the result and perhaps give it some form of support.  
   
  Maeve Quinlan, student: 
   
   I hope that we can move forward and bring in the proposed legislation without conflict. I hope the no side respectfully accept this democratic result, and do not engage in hurtful and distasteful protesting outside medical centres and clinics. These protests as seen in the UK and US are misguided and aim to shame those seeking medical support. 
   
  
 Updated at 6.25pm BST 
 
 
  5.58pm BST  
 Record turnout 
  
  Turnout has been confirmed at 64.51%, more than three points higher than in the same-sex marriage plebiscite in 2015 and a record in an Irish referendum. 
  
 
 
  5.56pm BST  
  
  Rain has started at Dublin Castle, and people are fleeing to shelter at the edges or pulling out umbrellas, reports Sinad Baker. 
  But very few people are leaving. Everyone remains eager to hear the final announcement. 
  
 
 
  5.51pm BST  
  
  Grainne Teggart, Amnesty Internationals Northern Ireland campaigns manager, has written for the Guardian on the urgent need to now reform the abortion law there, which dates back to 1861  literally from the Victorian era  and makes abortion illegal in almost every circumstance, even in cases of rape or fatal foetal abnormalities: 
   
   With legislation soon to follow Saturdays result in Ireland, we may soon see women in Northern Ireland catching trains over the border rather than planes over the sea for this healthcare. But well still be forced on those lonely and difficult journeys. 
   The UK government cannot continue to turn a blind eye to this absurd situation. Westminster has the power and responsibility to bring Northern Ireland abortion law in to line with human rights standards, but is choosing instead to be complicit in our harm and suffering and is continuing to deny us equality. 
   For the past 16 months, Northern Ireland has been without devolved government. But this is no excuse - having a Stormont government in place would not relieve the UK government of its responsibility to ensure that women right to abortion is upheld. Devolution is no justification for the denial of women rights. 
   A free abortion service in England is a helpful form of remedy, but its not the solution. In parallel with this, we must also see a process to bring about long overdue law reform in Northern Ireland. 
   It is important to remember that its the most vulnerable and marginalised women who are unable to travel and left most at risk by the current laws. Were talking about women who have experienced domestic violence, women without confirmed immigration status, young girls who cant fly without an adult, and those with health complications. 
   
  
 Updated at 6.16pm BST 
 
 
  5.37pm BST  
  
  Skys Darren McCaffrey in Donegal has a similar report to RTs from East Cork: it looks like the results from the last three constituencies (Sligo-Leitrim is the third) will be announced alongside or after the final national result.  
  The overall outcome, though, is not in any doubt: unofficial but generally accurate tallies suggest Donegal is the only constituency to have voted no, with yes looking a comfortable winner in East Cork and Sligo-Leitrim.  
   
   
    Bizarrely the Returning Officer in Donegal has been told she is not allowed to announce the result until after the national declaration. Seems all rather odd because she has the result! #the8th Darren McCaffrey (@DMcCaffreySKY) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 5.44pm BST 
 
 
  5.34pm BST  
  
  Here is the Guardians full video report on the day that fully two-thirds of Irelands voters backed the repeal of article 40.3.3, which since 1983 has effectively prohibited abortion in almost all cases: 
   
    
    
     
    
    
   
  
 Updated at 5.39pm BST 
 
 
  5.28pm BST  
  
  The crowd at Dublin Castle cheers as Sinn Fin leader Mary Lou McDonald holds up a sign saying The North is next ... reports Sinad Baker.  
   
    
   
    Dublin Castle crowd cheers Sinn Finn leaders The North is next banner
    
   
  
 
 
  5.12pm BST  
  
  Were still waiting on the final three constituencies: Cork East, Sligo-Leitrim, and Donegal, which observers are predicting may be the only one to back no.  
  RT is reporting that the Cork County returning officer has closed the count centre in Ballincollig. The results for Cork East have reportedly been sent to Dublin Castle and will be announced after the national result.  
  
 Updated at 5.24pm BST 
 
 
  5.01pm BST  
  
  Peter Boylan, leading yes campaigner and chair of the Institute of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, gets a heros welcome in Dublin Castle, with the crowd chanting Peter, Peter, Peter.  
   
    
   
    Peter Boylan gets a heros welcome at Dublin Castle
    
   
  Boylan came under fierce attack from some institute members when he claimed that the majority supported repeal, a claim he stood by earlier this month.  
  
 Updated at 5.18pm BST 
 
 
  4.52pm BST  
  
  Offered without comment: 
   
   
    Minister for health Simon Harris seems to have won over a lot of young hearts and minds with this campaign #8thref pic.twitter.com/wg5FdFdo4g Sinad Baker (@sineadbaker1) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  4.48pm BST  
  
  The 18-to-24 age group in Ireland has been strongly pro-repeal and many young people have contacted the Guardian.  
  One of them, Olivia Malone, 18, a student from County Wexford, canvassed during her exams for the yes campaign:  
   
   I graduated on Thursday, and was out with most of my year group till the early hours of the morning. I had a great time, but what worried me was whether my all girls school would drag themselves out to vote the next day.  
   Yet on Friday morning I woke up to texts in the 6th Year group chat - the girls were all encouraging each other to vote. The youth involvement in this has been unlike any other election Ive ever witnessed. Im floating on cloud nine.  
   Im totally astonished by the massive landslide. The general feeling among strong yes campaigners recently was cautious hope, and I know most that Ive talked to predicted a yes vote in the 50s, but this is beyond anything I can imagine. 
   
  If youd like to share your reaction, you can do so here.  
  
 Updated at 4.57pm BST 
 
 
  4.38pm BST  
  
  Dublin Bay South votes 78.49% yes, 21.51% no. 
  That leaves three constituencies still to declare. 
  
 
 
  4.36pm BST  
  
  The taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, has just tweeted this picture of himself and the expectant crowd at Dublin Castle: 
   
   
    Fantastic crowds at Dublin Castle. Remarkable day. A quiet revolution has taken place, a great act of democracy. pic.twitter.com/MLtzkSkdLw Leo Varadkar (@campaignforleo) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 4.58pm BST 
 
 
  4.34pm BST  
  
  The Irish comedian David ODoherty is at Dublin castle for the announcement, reports Sinad Baker. 
  He remembers growing up in an Ireland where most parts of the country voted against permitting divorce in 1995:  
   
   I always thought there was two Irelands ... but that died yesterday. It died with marriage equality and then it really died yesterday. 
   
   
    
   
    David ODoherty on the historic referendum result
    
   
  
 Updated at 4.58pm BST 
 
 
  4.29pm BST  
  
   
   Cork South West is 64.51% yes, 35.49% no 
   Dublin Mid-West 73.27% yes, 26.73% no 
   Kerry 58.27% yes, 41.73% no 
   
  
 Updated at 4.31pm BST 
 
 
  4.27pm BST  
  
  The crowd at Dublin Castle is cheering on the politicians that have been particularly active on the yes side of this campaign, including Leo Varadkar and health minister Simon Harris, says Sinad Baker: 
   
    
   
    Crowds at Dublin Castle cheer pro-repeal politicians.
    
   
  
 Updated at 4.59pm BST 
 
 
  4.24pm BST  
  
  Seven constituencies remain: Kerry, Sligo-Leitrim, Cork South-West, Cork East, Dublin Mid-West, Dublin Bay South and Donegal, which observers are suggesting might be the only one to vote against repealing the eighth amendment.  
   
   
    I must be in the only count centre in Ireland where NO ONE is celebrating  #Donegal #abortionreferendum #Letterkenny pic.twitter.com/fQL33jxQPo Erinn Louise Kerr (@ErinnKerr_) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  4.21pm BST  
  
  With half a dozen constituencies left to declare, Ireland is turning purple: 
   
   
    This is quite a sight on historic day. pic.twitter.com/aMfaGUnqVR lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  4.16pm BST  
  
  More results:  
   
   Cavan-Monaghan 55.5% yes, 44.5% no 
   Mayo 57.07% yes, 42.93% no 
   
  And the Taoiseach has arrived at Dublin Castle, says RTE2s man on the spot: 
   
   
    Taoiseach Leo Varadkar arriving at Dublin Castle #8thRef pic.twitter.com/VOUHYQ27VW Philip Bromwell (@philipbromwell) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 4.18pm BST 
 
 
  4.11pm BST  
  
  Readers in Northern Ireland have been contacting the Guardian urging abortion reform there. Aoibhinn, whos studying for A-levels in Belfast, says shes relieved about the result in Ireland but feels isolated as a young women in Northern Ireland:  
   
   We are now poised to be the only place within these islands without access to abortion. I hope with all my heart that the forces that campaigned to repeal the eighth will now lend us a hand in dragging our laws into the 21st century.  
   
  Pete Doughty, a civil servant from Belfast, would like to see legislation change too: 
   
   Abortion is never, ever an easy option to choose ... Ive seen friends of mine here in Northern Ireland having to take that decision  and then having to travel  alone, stressed, in comparative secrecy, and at great expense  to England and back, at the expense of their dignity and peace of mind.  
   Women in Northern Ireland have always been under the same pressure as Irish women, but after this result they will now, tragically, stand alone. That cant be allowed to continue. 
   Westminster must now step in and give Northern Irish women the right to be believed and trusted that our socially conservative politicians will always wish to deny them. 
   
  If youd like to share your reaction, you can do so here.  
  
 Updated at 4.31pm BST 
 
 
  4.09pm BST  
  
  Another couple of results, bringing us  according to RT - up to 30 out of 40 constituencies: 
   
   Cork North-West 60.10% yes, 39.90% no 
   Longford-Westmeath 58.27% yes, 41.73% no 
   
  
 
 
  4.06pm BST  
  
  Derek Mooney, a former Fianna Fil government adviser, has an very interesting take on the scale of the yes vote and what lay behind it: 
   
   The general assumption right up to the last week was that yes would win decisively, with a comfortable margin, leaving the no side in the low-40s nationally and tipping just over the 50% mark in the western, more rural constituencies. 
   Not for the first time the voters proved the pundits wrong. And the movement to yes happened long before the first posters hit the lampposts. Many traditional, middle-ground voters  including those who still see themselves as pro-life - decided some time back that it was time to take the issue of abortion out of the Irish constitution. 
   This referendum was about nuance, and Irish voters showed that they get nuance. So do voters in most countries. They know that very few issues are simply black or white.  
   Many voters, including those who had real qualms about some aspects of what the government proposes in its legislation, accepted the nuances and complexities, considered them and  on balance  accepted the case for repeal. 
   This is the seismic change that has happened in Ireland today. In a world that seems destined to rush to this or that easy populist position, Irish voters took the time to inform themselves. They listened to the expert opinions from all sides and weighed the arguments.  
   The political system afforded them that opportunity by having a long pre-campaign period where arguments, for and against, were calmly made. If only the Brexit referendum had been handled so calmly and sensibly. 
   
  
 Updated at 4.56pm BST 
 
 
  3.57pm BST  
  
  Three more Dublin results are in: 
   
   Dublin-Fingal, 76.96% yes, 23.04% no 
   Dublin Rathdown 76.10% yes, 23.90% no 
   Dublin South-West 74.91% yes, 25.09% no 
   
  
 
 
  3.55pm BST  
  
  More from Sinad Baker at the Together for Yes festivities in Dublin: 
   
   Those who flew home to vote are well represented at the yes campaigns official gathering to watch the results.  
   I talked to Hannah Little, a co-founder of the London-Irish Abortion Rights Campaign, two weeks ago in London and then she spoke of the importance of the result for many of the Irish living abroad. 
   A lot of people have plans to go home and have a family, she said. I think this referendum will signal whether Ireland is a country we want to bring children up in. 
   Catching up with her at todays event, she said that todays result would absolutely hearten Irish women around the world. It shows us the country has grown up and matured. It cares about women. 
   A lot women that Ive spoken to today have expressed similar sentiments. Im proud to be Irish, is a common refrain. 
   
  
 Updated at 3.59pm BST 
 
 
  3.53pm BST  
  
  Dublin West has voted 74.02% for yes, 25.98% for no 
  
 
 
  3.52pm BST  
  
  Back in Roscommon, Lisa OCarroll has met more cheerful voters  and one not so happy. 
   
   
    Im delighted with result says Caitlin McConn, who runs Harlows pub in Roscommon. My mum, my dad, sister, brother-in law all voted yes. But Claire Feeley, 38 (not pictured) said she was disappointed and shocked at Roscommon result pic.twitter.com/CQa2qOfmOx lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 5.09pm BST 
 
 
  3.51pm BST  
  
  The DUP has spoken, and its not happy about the prospect of abortion law reform in Northern Ireland: 
   
   
    The DUP says it will \"not be bullied\" into accepting abortion reform in Northern Ireland lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  3.44pm BST  
  
  Another clutch of results, still all one-way traffic: 
   
   Dn Laoghaire 77.06% yes, 22.94% no 
   Dublin Bay North 74.69% yes, 25.31% no 
   Dublin South-Central 74.79%, 25.21% 
   
  
 Updated at 3.45pm BST 
 
 
  3.43pm BST  
  
  Henry McDonald sounds a note of caution about abortion reform coming any time soon to Northern Ireland: 
   
   It is not as simple as Theresa May and the British government deciding to impose or extend the 1967 Abortion Act to the region  the only part of the UK where terminations in most cases are illegal in local hospitals. 
   Devolution is currently in suspended animation in a traditional orange-green row over an Irish Language Act and other cultural issues and even if the Northern Ireland assembly was restored, a majority of members oppose abortion reform especially on the unionist benches.  
   Pro-abortion reform parliamentarians at Westminster such as Stella Creasy could move a private members bill in this hiatus period of de facto direct rule from London. But when this was tried recently by another Labour MP for gay marriage equality (another social reform blocked principally by the DUP), backbench Tories refused to cooperate and the private bill fell by the wayside.  
   It is hard to see too how Mays minority Conservative government would agree to a free vote on introducing abortion into Northern Ireland given the power the DUP exercises at Westminster where its votes keep her in No 10 Downing Street.  
   The DUP would be highly likely to exert its parliamentary muscle to pressurise the Tories not to back any Labour sponsored private members bill when it came to the abortion question. The abortion controversy on the island of Ireland will rage on, albeit only now on the northern side of the Irish border.  
   
  
 Updated at 3.52pm BST 
 
 
  3.37pm BST  
 RT: final official result expected in one hour 
  
  Over half the constituency results are now in, and the count stands at 66% and 34%, on a record turnout of 63.9%.  
  The national broadcaster RT says the final national results should be announced within an hour. 
  Two more: 
   
   Meath West 63.95% yes, 36.05% no 
   Galway West 65.95% yes, 34.05% no  
   
  
 Updated at 3.38pm BST 
 
 
  3.31pm BST  
  
  Some readers whove got in touch with the Guardian have described how difficult the referendum campaign has been because of the sensitivity of the issue.  
  Michelle, a writer and mother of two young boys who lives in Dublin, says she was one of the silent yes voters: 
   
   I was one of those women, partly because of the very conservative workplace that I am employed in of but also because I did not want to offend no voters, who did not discuss my opinions. Why, I wonder now, did I not feel comfortable to speak out, to be honest, to loudly shout how passionately I felt about the need for yes? Because I grew up in an Ireland that diminished the rights of women, punished women for being unmarried mothers and in some cases incarcerated those women and removed their children from them. 
   
   When she heard the result, Michelle said: 
   
   I felt like a weight had lifted, that shame and stigma surrounding so many women in my own family had been wiped away. It was acceptable at last for a women to make her own decisions and live her life without judgment. 
   
  Kate, a scientist and mother living in rural Ireland, said she voted yes, but reluctantly:  
   
   Yes is the right decision but discussion needs to continue regarding support for women in Ireland. We need to examine our society at a deeper level and have more discussion about factors such as contraception, social housing ... mental health. Abortion is the last resort for women. I would like to see both sides working together now to make family life better in this country and abortion as rare as possible.  
   
  If youd like to share your reaction, you can do so here.  
  
 Updated at 3.39pm BST 
 
 
  3.27pm BST  
  
  It looks like Donegal is shaping up to be the only place to spoil the yes campaigns party, reportedly by a very slender margin: 
   
   
    BREAKING: Based on tallies, Independent TD @ThomasPringleTD has told RT that \"it will be a No vote\" in Donegal RT Politics (@rtepolitics) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 3.29pm BST 
 
 
  3.25pm BST  
  
  More results, thick and fast. And once-conservative Roscommon confirmed as yes: 
   
   Limerick City 66.87% yes, 33.13% 
   Louth 66.55% yes, 33.45% no 
   Meath East 69.21% yes, 30.79% no 
   Kildare North 73.56% yes, 26.44% no  
   Dublin North-West 73.08% yes, 26.92% no 
   Roscommon-Galway 57.21% yes, 42.79% no 
   
  
 Updated at 3.28pm BST 
 
 
  3.14pm BST  
  
  Irelands childrens minister, Katherine Zappone, has stressed to Sinad Baker the need to enact legislation the countrys new abortion legislation as soon as possible:  
   
   The minister for health has promised to publish the bill before the summer and it would be our intention to ensure that we bring that forward before the end of this year. Until that happens women still need to travel or to take an abortion pill from online delivery thats illegal or unsafe until we get the better law in place. 
   
   
    
   
    The Irish childrens minister, Katherine Zappone, speaks to Sinad Baker
    
   
  Zappone also thanked the women who had shared their stories of how they were affected by the eighth amendment:  
   
   Its because of their willingness to tell their stories that they were able to change the hearts and the minds of the citizens but also many of the politicians too. 
   
  
 Updated at 3.22pm BST 
 
 
  3.09pm BST  
  
  Another result: Offaly 58.05% yes, 41.95% no. 
  
 Updated at 3.10pm BST 
 
 
  3.08pm BST  
  
  Calls are mounting for the British government to take steps to reform the strict abortion regime in Northern Ireland following the Republics historic decision.  
  Labour MP Stella Creasy: 
   
   This weekend 2.5 million Irish women won the basic human right to make choices themselves about their own bodies - those who fought this victory did so because these rights are at the heart of equality. Yet as we celebrate, we cannot rest knowing a million women in Northern Ireland do not have the same choice and that the UN has accused the U.K. government of cruel and inhuman treatment of their own citizens as a result. We cannot let Northern Irish women be left behind. 
   
  Cara Sanquest form the London-Irish Abortion Rights Campaign: 
   
   The result today shows that the people of Ireland want to provide care and compassion at home. This was a grassroots campaign, with women voices at the centre. Women in Northern Ireland, who do not have access to abortion in their own country, are at the forefront of our minds today. Eleven women from the island of Ireland boarded planes this morning to access abortion services abroad. Were looking forward to a swift passing of the legislation, and that the momentum from this result will carry on with our campaign to decriminalise abortion in Northern Ireland. 
   
  Grainne Teggart, Northern Ireland campaigns manager for Amnesty International: 
   
   The referendum result is a momentous win for women rights. This marks the beginning of a new Ireland - one that really does trust and value its women. The UK Government can no longer turn a blind eye and deny us equality, they must urgently legislate for reform which must include decriminalisation of abortion. We cannot be left behind in a corner of the UK and on the island of Ireland as second-class citizens. 
   
  
 
 
  2.59pm BST  
  
  Its becoming a procession: 
   
   Wexford has voted 68.40% for yes and 31.60% for no. 
   Limerick County 58.08% yes, 41.92% no 
   Tipperary 59.15% yes, 40.85% no 
   Kildare South 70.66% yes, 29.34% no 
   Clare 64.28% yes, 35.72% no 
   
  
 Updated at 3.02pm BST 
 
 
  2.58pm BST  
  
  The president of March for Life, the US anti-abortion rally that backed the SaveThe8th campaign, has reacted with dismay to the projected result. The groups president, Jeanne Mancini, said:  
   
   We are deeply saddened to learn that many Irish people voted against love and life by repealing the 8thamendment. Americans know from experience that there will be many grave and irreversible consequences to this decision, including the loss of precious lives.  
   A study released this week shows that legalising abortion greatly increases the number of children whose lives are terminated in the womb. Though they are the first, unborn children are not the only victims; abortion harms mothers too.  
   Life is the empowering decision. We grieve for the great loss this beautiful country will endure and we pray that they find a way to reverse this unfortunate decision. 
   
  
 
 
  2.53pm BST  
  
  Another result is in: Laois 61.35% yes, 38.65% no 
  
 
 
  2.49pm BST  
  
  Theyre having a ball down at Dublin Castle, too:  
   
   
    Grand old singalong in Dublin Castle @dangriffinIT pic.twitter.com/XLXmRQ60A0 Garg (@Holohag) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 2.51pm BST 
 
 
  2.47pm BST  
  
  Sinad Baker is with the Together for Yes campaign who have gathered yes campaigners in a Dublin hotel to watch the results come in.  
   
   A diverse crowd of hundreds of people have gathered. Local organisers from all parts of the country are here with their teams alongside the politicians and students who have been key to the campaign. 
   Results coming in are met with huge cheers and some stunned disbelief. Listen to the delight as Carlow-Kilkenny votes 63.5% yes: 
   
   
    
   
    Sinad Baker hears Together for Yes campaigners cheer another positive result
    
   
   
    
   
  
 Updated at 2.48pm BST 
 
 
  2.36pm BST  
  
  And another. With seven constituencies declared, the vote now stands at 68.7% in favour of repeal overall.  
   
   Waterford 69.43% yes, 30.57% no 
   
  
 Updated at 2.39pm BST 
 
 
  2.29pm BST  
  
  Two more results have come in, again in line with last nights exit polls:  
   
   Wicklow 74.26% yes, 25.74% no 
   Carlow-Kilkenny, 63.50% yes, 36.50% no 
   
  
 Updated at 2.38pm BST 
 
 
  2.27pm BST  
  
  Orla OConnor, co-director of the Together for Yes campaign, celebrates a monumental day for women in Ireland, saying the expected referendum vote is about a rejection of an Ireland that treats women as second-class citizens. 
   
    
    
     
    
    
   
  
 
 
  2.21pm BST  
  
  Readers have been getting in touch to share their reaction to the result.  
  Chelsea, a student teacher in Dublin, is very happy that the yes vote was so high. Im over the moon to know that Ireland has voted so strongly in favour of removing legislation that is potentially damaging to women and families in our country. I think its an overwhelming turn out for a referendum and proves the importance of making a change. 
  Philomena Mason, 62, from Galway says its a wonderful day for Ireland. Mason voted against the amendment being included in the constitution in 1983 and thinks the change has come about about because of the testimony of women during this referendum campaign.  
  A lot of women have told harrowing stories of crisis pregnancies where they had no option but to travel to the UK for terminations and felt strongly that this care should be made available in their own country. 
  Nick, a junior doctor who lives in Ireland, thinks that the result is a huge win for women, doctors and legislators so that it will now be possible to provide healthcare, compassion and support at home rather than turning our backs on people in need.  
  Rossa Bunworth, 67, a retired public servant from Dublin says hes stunned and delighted as a parent and grandparent of women and girls who are trusted at last. 
  If youd like to share your reaction, you can do so here.  
  
 Updated at 2.31pm BST 
 
 
  2.14pm BST  
  
  Sinad Baker in Dublin has spoken to a proud and happy local: 
   
   
    Dubliner Terry OConnor, 62, shared his joy at todays #8thRef result: Its well overdue. The Catholic Church has ruled for decades. What right have they to say how a women protects her body? Im delighted with the result. pic.twitter.com/mRjhGlvadl Sinad Baker (@sineadbaker1) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  And here is an opposing point of view: 
   
   
    Let us pray together that satanic evil has not gained a foothold in Ireland, through legalized killing of the most innocent life in the womb, that will now take many years to exorcise. #SaveThe8th Fr. Kevin M. Cusick (@MCITLFrAphorism) 
    May 25, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 2.17pm BST 
 
 
  2.05pm BST  
  
  The crowds are starting to assemble at Dublin Castle, where Irelands health minister, Simon Harris, is speaking, RT reports: 
   
   
    Its a very emotional day @SimonHarrisTD speaking to the media at Dublin Castle #8thRef pic.twitter.com/2effLpRpRi Philip Bromwell (@philipbromwell) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 2.32pm BST 
 
 
  2.02pm BST  
  
  The Liberal Democrat leader, Vince Cable, has told the BBC that action will now have to be taken over Northern Ireland, set to be the only part of the UK and Ireland where abortions are outlawed bar exceptional circumstances: 
   
   I believe in the principle of the right to choose - I think in the rest of the UK we have a sensible balance. The position in Northern Ireland is now highly anomalous and I think, probably, action will now have to be taken. 
   Since there is, effectively, direct rule from Westminster, the government has responsibility and it can and should take the opportunity to deal with this issue properly. 
   
  
 
 
  1.59pm BST  
  
  The official turnout has been given as 62.2%, an increase of 2% over Irelands referendum on same-sex marriage: 
   
   
    How its looking at the moment in Dublin Castle #8thRef pic.twitter.com/evuI4y5FAF Louise Cullen (@LouiseMCullen) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  1.55pm BST  
  
  Cork North-Central is in: 64.02% for yes, 35.98% for no. 
  
 Updated at 2.33pm BST 
 
 
  1.49pm BST  
  
  Heres what the count looks like in Roscommon-Galway, and presumably a good many counting centres up and down the country this afternoon: 
   
   
    No official result yet from Roscommon-Galway but the bundles of ballots tell the tale. #rsgal #rosgal #8thref #Referendum2018 @rtenews pic.twitter.com/pvManqYXbI Caitriona Perry (@CaitrionaPerry) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  1.41pm BST  
  
  Weve had two more official results showing a clear lead for repeal: 
   
   Dublin Central: Yes 76.51%, No 23.49% 
   Cork South-Central: Yes 68.84%, No 31.16% 
   
  
 
 
  1.37pm BST  
  
  The Guardians Henry McDonald is at Dublin Castle where the official results will be announced later today: 
   
   Unlike the result of the same-sex marriage equality referendum three years ago, there will be no giant screens on display at Dublin Castle today broadcasting the overall national result of the vote to legalise abortion. 
   Although no one is saying it too loudly, I understand security reasons have convinced the authorities at the former seat of British power in Ireland not to hold a giant screening of the main result this afternoon. 
   These were based on concerns about possible ugly scenes emerging between yes and no camp followers arguing on the cobblestones of the ancient square. 
   Which all seems a bit much given firstly that there appear to be few supporters of the no campaign around at present, and secondly, that despite some minor incidents the 2018 referendum has not been marred by ugly, fractious scenes on the campaign trail. 
   
  
 Updated at 2.33pm BST 
 
 
  1.27pm BST  
 First official constituency result 
  
  The first official constituency result is in, from Galway East:  
   
   
    BREAKING: First official result in from Galway East Yes 60.2% to No 39.8% RT Politics (@rtepolitics) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  1.24pm BST  
  
  The British government cannot ignore the expected massive endorsement for abortion reform in the Irish Republic while a near total ban on terminations remains over the border in Northern Ireland, Amnesty International has said. 
  While describing the projected victory for the yes side as a momentous win for women rights the global human rights group said their counterparts in Northern Ireland were still prosecuted by a Victorian-era abortion ban. 
  Northern Ireland is now the only region in the UK where the 1967 Abortion Act does not apply, said Grainne Teggart, Amnesty Internationals Northern Ireland campaign manager:  
   
   Its hypocritical, degrading and insulting to Northern Irish women that we are forced to travel for vital healthcare services but cannot access them at home. The UK government can no longer turn a blind eye and deny us equality. We cannot be left behind in a corner of the UK and on the island of Ireland as second-class citizens.  
   
  The UKs supreme court is soon expected to make a ruling on a case considering whether the regional abortion ban breaches Northern Irish women rights. And in September the court in London will hear the case of a mother who is being prosecuted for buying abortion pills for her daughter.  
  
 Updated at 2.34pm BST 
 
 
  1.20pm BST  
  
  More from Lisa OCarroll who has spoken to some overjoyed and tearful yes voters in traditionally conservative Roscommon: 
   
   
    Mother Georgina Barrow and daughter Natalie who had just done the tally on their own parish and it came in 90 to 66 in favour of repeal!. They were overwhelmed. \"We had really good feedback on the doors, but you just don't know what people will do when they are in the booth\" lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 1.23pm BST 
 
 
  1.14pm BST  
 Varadkar says he hopes abortion will be legal in Ireland by year-end 
  
  Irelands taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, has said he hopes laws to allow abortions in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy would be in place in Ireland by the end of the year, with the expected referendum results giving the government a clear mandate to do so.  
  Vardkar told national broadcaster RT the expected landslide for yes was the culmination of a quiet revolution, adding that the expected two-to-one backing for constitutional reform to liberalise abortion laws showed the country was not divided.  
  We are united, he said, and the referendum allows us as a nation to come of age. Health minister Simon Harris, who was at the vanguard of the government campaign, said he always knew Irish people were decent and compassionate.  
  
 Updated at 1.24pm BST 
 
 
  12.43pm BST  
  
  In traditionally conservative Roscommon/East Galway, the first unofficial tally is showing 57% for yes and 43% for no, reports the Guardians Lisa OCarroll. 
   
   
    Latest from Roscommon tallies: 98 out of 132 ballot boxes counted (none left unopened). Yes: 57.46%No: 42.59% lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  Lisa has spoken to one voter who explained that in this constituency, the shy vote was in favour of repeal in the eighth amendment, not saving it: 
   
   
    The shy voter won Roscommon for yes side.  delight but for weeks now weve known there was support for the yes side. There were a lot of quiet voters who wouldnt say how they were voting but if you had asked me to call it I would have said Ros was a yes, Julie ODonoghue pic.twitter.com/LhMsRfsmsf lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 1.21pm BST 
 
 
  12.38pm BST  
  
  Irelands minister for children and youth affairs has said she is grateful and emotional at voters apparent overwhelming decision to repeal the eighth amendment. 
  Katherine Zappone said she was confident new abortion legislation could be approved by parliament and put in place before the end of the year:  
   
   I feel very emotional. Im especially grateful to the women of Ireland who came forward to provide their personal testimony about the hard times that they endured, the stress and the trauma that they experienced because of the eighth amendment. 
   
  
 Updated at 1.24pm BST 
 
 
  12.34pm BST  
  
  Irelands prime minister, Leo Varadkar, has said the expected overwhelming win for the yes side was the culmination of a quiet revolution in Ireland. 
  The taoiseach said this process of change for women had started over a number of decades. We will have a modern constitution for a modern country, he said, adding that the predicted outcome also demonstrated that Ireland was not sharply divided by the abortion issue any longer. 
  Meanwhile his deputy prime minister, Simon Coveney, said the exit polls showed the result was not a Dublin versus the rest situation. Coveney said the predicted rural-urban split over the referendum had not materialised.  
  
 Updated at 1.24pm BST 
 
 
  12.33pm BST  
 Cabinet approval for legal text to be sought as early as Tuesday 
  
  Irelands health minister, Simon Harris, has said he will ask for formal cabinet approval as early as this Tuesday to turn the governments draft abortion law into a formal legislative text, Sky News is reporting:  
   
   
    Health Minister @SimonHarrisTD says hell ask for formal cabinet approval this Tuesday to turn the draft abortion law into a full text. #Repealed #RepealThe8th Beth Rigby (@BethRigby) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 12.34pm BST 
 
 
  12.26pm BST  
  
  While the yes camp appears to be decisively ahead in most constituencies, the vote appears to be neck-and-neck in rural Donegal.  
  The ballot boxes have now been emptied but there is no decisive result as yet, the BBCs reporter in Letterkenny, Erinn Louise Kerr, reports: 
   
   
    Down to the last few boxes in #letterkenny #donegal and still no closer to a result #abortionreferendum - nowhere are the tallies as tight as here. pic.twitter.com/bzumDslAXL Erinn Louise Kerr (@ErinnKerr_) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 12.27pm BST 
 
 
  12.20pm BST  
  
  Ivana Bacik, an Irish Labour party senator and leading light of the campaign to repeal the eight amendment, has written for the Guardian about her reaction to the anticipated referendum result and why she thinks it happened: 
   
   How did we succeed? Over the many weeks of this long campaign, I have been out canvassing extensively for a yes, in Dublin and elsewhere. The growing public awareness of the immense harm and hardship caused by the eighth amendment became increasingly apparent to me over the campaign. 
   In truth, many people in Ireland had already recognised the reality that the eighth amendment represented an absolute bar to any lifting of the prohibition on abortion, even in cases of rape, risk to women health or fatal foetal abnormality ... Over the years, public opinion had thus shifted towards supporting repeal.  
   The governments proposed legislation was vociferously opposed by no campaigners, who argued it would lead to abortion on demand and it was dangerous to leave the job of making law to elected legislators, on the basis that politicians cant be trusted  a profoundly populist and anti-democratic argument. 
   The resounding yes vote we appear to have now achieved shows that the majority of Irish citizens simply rejected the scaremongering tactics of the no side. It shows that as a society we recognise the need for our democratically elected legislators to introduce an appropriate legal framework for the regulation of lawful termination of pregnancy.  
   As a student campaigner in the 1980s I was taken to court and threatened with prison for distributing information to Irish women on where to access abortion. I am very grateful to my fellow Irish citizens who appear to have voted so overwhelmingly for a more democratic, equal and progressive Ireland. 
   
  You can read the full article here. 
  
 Updated at 12.21pm BST 
 
 
  12.04pm BST  
  
  Leading no campaigner John McGuirk, communications officer for Save the 8th, has posted a message on his Facebook page for all who voted to keep Irelands strict anti-abortion laws. 
  Today will be a hard and difficult day, but he says no one should give up: 
   
   Like many of you I am broken-hearted about the apparent result, and its many implications, which go way beyond abortion.  
   I fear that over the coming years, more and more women and their families will sadly learn that it was never the journey that was lonely, but the decision, and that it was not the country that is cruel, but the decision. 
   Thank you all, so much, for your work and your friendship. Today will be a hard and difficult day, but hold your heads high. It is never wrong to speak up for what you believe in. It is wrong to stay silent, and especially wrong to stay silent when the crowd is totally against you. I will never stay silent. I hope the rest of you will join me. 
   If you voted no, be proud, and defiant. Now is the time when your voice is needed more than ever.  
   
  
 Updated at 12.20pm BST 
 
 
  11.58am BST  
  
  Expecting a close result, one Dublin students union hosted a chill village that provided a quiet space where students could de-stress while watching the result, writes Sinad Baker from Dublin. 
  But after the hugely encouraging signs for yes, it appeared many students found that they didnt need it. From those here, the results coming in are met with huge cheers. 
  The welfare officer of the students union at Trinity College, Damien McClean, said the union had expected a closer result and a lot of stressed students: 
   
    
   
    Trinity college student union welfare officer Damien McClean speaks to Sinad Baker.
    
   
  Its better that we have these spaces open and theyre not used and theyre not needed to be used rather than not have them in the first place, McClean said. 
   
   
    Its a symbol of how much larger the #8thref Yes vote is compared to what many had predicted: a Dublin students union arranged a viewing space where students could destress in a quiet space. After the hugely positive exit polls, there were just 14 students present. pic.twitter.com/zfDJwWvQdm Sinad Baker (@sineadbaker1) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 12.18pm BST 
 
 
  11.46am BST  
 Opposition Fianna Fail leader promises backing 
  
  The leader of Irelands main Irish opposition party, Fianna Fail, has insisted his anti-abortion parliamentarians will not stand in the way of the will of the Irish people and block legislation leading to abortion up to 12 weeks. 
  Micheal Martin gambled with his leadership by coming out in favour of a yes vote even though 32 of his Dail deputies were on the no side in the campaign. The RT exit poll breakdown of political parties attitudes to the referendum also found that a small majority of Fianna Fail voters, 50.3%, backed the no camp in Fridays poll. 
  But speaking his native Cork City on Saturday morning, Martin said he believed that members of the Dail would have to honour the will of the people and allow for the passage of the governments planned legislation. 
  Martin said it was now clear from the two exit polls that Ireland had emphatically passed the referendum and that his party should back the Fine Gael-led government to legalise abortion.  
  
 Updated at 11.48am BST 
 
 
  11.40am BST  
  
  Roscommon, which was considered a bellwether for the no camp, has confounded all expectations with tallies currently showing a 57% victory for yes. MEP Luke Ming Flanagan, a former TD for the constituency said he always knew voters would come out in favour of repeal: I always knew voters were not conservative  they are just a bit complicated.  
   
    
   
    MEP Luke Ming Flanagan speaks to Lisa OCaroll
    
   
  
 Updated at 11.41am BST 
 
 
  11.36am BST  
  
  Irelands health minister, Simon Harris, sums up for RT Radio what the expected referendum result will mean for the successors of the tens of thousands of Irish women who have had to travel abroad for an abortion: 
   
   
    \"Instead of saying take the boat, were now saying take our hand and we will look after you.\" Minister for Health Simon Harris @SimonHarrisTD speaking on RT radio. pic.twitter.com/gLpJIE0t3T RT Politics (@rtepolitics) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 11.38am BST 
 
 
  11.30am BST  
 How the count works 
  
  The count began shortly after 9am and is now well under way, with ballots from the 40 constituencies being tallied at 26 centres around the country. 
  At the same time, unofficial tallies  which give an accurate picture of the result, and are so far confirming the exit polls forecast of a landslide for yes  are being kept and released piecemeal through the day.  
  First official results are expected from early afternoon, with local returning officers reporting their constituency results to the referendum returning officer who will will formally declare the national result at Dublin Castle when all 40 constituencies are in. 
  In past referendums, according to the national broadcaster RT, the overall result has been declared as early as 2.15pm, and as late as 7pm. 
  
 Updated at 11.39am BST 
 
 
  11.18am BST  
  
  More from the streets of Dublin from Sinad Baker:  
  The relief is palpable from those who were hoping for a yes victory. Signs are already been taken down at one Temple Bar shop, where manager Mark Ryan says the shop sold out of repeal mechanise before the vote.  
   
   
    Yes materials are coming down. Mark Ryan, a manager at PhotoIreland Foundation, which acted as a vendor for #TogetherforYes, described his relief at the result. Its been an exhausting couple of months. The shop had sold out of #repealthe8th merchandise in advance of #8thref. pic.twitter.com/qCdYAeGPe5 Sinad Baker (@sineadbaker1) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  11.07am BST  
  
  Andanappa Yalagi, the father of Savita Halappanavar, who died of sepsis in Galway in 2012 after being denied an abortion during a protracted miscarriage, said he was very happy today.Speaking to Harriet Sherwood by phone from his home in Karnataka, in south-west India, Yalagi said:  
   
   Weve got justice for Savita. What happened to her will not happen to any other family. I have no words to express my gratitude to the people of Ireland at this historic moment. 
   
  Halappanavars death galvanised the movement to repeal the eighth amendment. Prof Sir Sabaratnam Arulkumaran, who chaired an official investigation into her death, called on voters this week to back the repeal, saying it tied doctors hands.She was 17 weeks pregnant when she died at the age of 31. 
  
 
 
  11.04am BST  
  
  Sinad Baker is out and about on the streets of Dublin, where the mood is very positive, she reports: 
  People are struggling to articulate exactly how theyre feeling, but relief seems to be the dominant emotion, particularly for those who have been campaigning for years.  
  Sarah Brennan is celebrating in Temple Bar today with her sister and nephew. Ive been working towards this for quite a while, she said. Its amazing. It shows that Ireland is moving on. Women dont have to tell their stories anymore, and thats important.  
   
   
    Sarah Brennan and her family stopped in front of the testimonies left by #8thref Yes voters in Temple Bar. Ive been working towards this for quite a while. Its amazing. It shows that Ireland is moving on. Women dont have to tell their stories anymore, and thats important. pic.twitter.com/uMyrbiDapD Sinad Baker (@sineadbaker1) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  11.02am BST  
 What will Ireland's new abortion law look like, and how does it compare? 
  
  The eighth amendment  article 40.3.3 of the Irish constitution  will be replaced with a clause stating: Provision may be made by law for the regulation of termination of pregnancy. 
  The Irish government is planning to bring legislation before the Dil providing for abortion on request up to the 12th week of pregnancy with a three-day cooling-off period before abortion medication is administered. 
  Between 12 and 24 weeks, abortion will only be available in cases of fatal foetal abnormality, a risk to a womens life or a risk of serious harm to the health of the mother. After 24 weeks, termination will be possible in cases of fatal foetal abnormality. 
  There will be provision for conscientious objection among medical practitioners, although doctors will be obliged to transfer care of the pregnant women to another doctor. 
  How does this compare to elsewhere? 
  Most European countries allow abortion on request up to 12 weeks. Iceland permits it up to 16 weeks, Sweden 18 weeks and the Netherlands 22 weeks. 
  Abortion is banned in all circumstances in Malta, and in Poland and Cyprus it is only permitted in cases of grave risk to the health of the mother, fatal foetal abnormality, rape and incest. 
  In the UK, abortions can be carried out up to 24 weeks with the agreement of two doctors. Abortions after 24 weeks are allowed only if the womens life is at risk or the child would be born with a severe abnormality. 
  The conservative government of Poland, which already has one of the strictest abortion laws in Europe, has proposed tightening it further by banning abortion in cases of severe foetal disorders, including Downs syndrome. 
  Several US states are also tightening access to abortion. Abortion is completely prohibited in El Salvador, Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, and highly restricted in many other South American countries. 
  
 Updated at 11.23am BST 
 
 
  10.55am BST  
  
  The projected yes victory looks like a foregone conclusion if social media mentions are anything to go by.  
  The online data analysts Meltwater crunched two days of social media conversations around the world on Thursday and Friday  the day of the referendum  and found the Repealthe8th hashtag was 11 times more popular than the no hashtag: 
  #RepealThe8th/#Repeal8th  total number of mentions: 335,373 
  Trending themes: Ireland, women, abortion, abortion pill, sink, jail sentence, vote, #hometovote, freedom, jail sentence 
  Geographical spread: UK, Ireland, US, Australia, Canada 
  #SaveTheEighth/#savethe8th  total number of mentions: 30,450 
  Trending themes: Ireland, life, abortion, human life, people, vote, amendment, pray, young Irish women, child 
  Geographical spread: US, Ireland, UK, Canada, Australia 
  #HometoVote  total number of mentions: 192,142 
  Trending themes: Ireland, today, women, abortion, Savita Halappanvar, pregnancy, doctors, sepsis, Dublin airport 
  
 Updated at 9.45am BST 
 
 
  10.45am BST  
  
  The international organisation that sponsored two Irish women who sued the government at the UN over being forced to have abortions abroad said the projected yes victory would give hope to women across the world today. 
  The New York-based Center for Reproductive Rights, which backed  among others  Amanda Mellets complaint to the UN, said the expected yes vote would reverberate globally for years to come. Leah Hoctor, the regional director for Europe at the CRR, said:  
   
   If the referendum passes it will mark a historic moment for the women of Ireland. Irish laws on abortion have long been among the most restrictive in the world and wholly out of step with legislation in almost every other European country  Women living in counties with highly restrictive abortion laws would have cause for hope that significant change can be achieved. 
   
  
 Updated at 11.23am BST 
 
 
  10.40am BST  
 Save the 8th campaign concedes defeat 
  
  Save the 8th, which led the no campaign, has effectively conceded defeat, saying in a statement on its website that Irish voters have perpetrated a tragedy of historic proportions. 
   
   The 8th amendment did not create a right to life for the unborn child  it merely acknowledged that such a right exists, has always existed, and will always exist. 
   What Irish voters did yesterday is a tragedy of historic proportions. However, a wrong does not become right simply because a majority support it. 
   We are so proud of all of those who stood with us in this campaign: our supporters, our donors, our families and our loved ones. This campaign took a huge personal toll on all of us who were involved, and we have been so grateful for their support. 
   The unborn child no longer has a right to life recognised by the Irish state. Shortly, legislation will be introduced that will allow babies to be killed in our country. We will oppose that legislation. If and when abortion clinics are opened in Ireland, because of the inability of the government to keep their promise about a GP-led service, we will oppose that as well. Every time an unborn child has his or her life ended in Ireland, we will oppose that, and make our voices known. 
   Abortion was wrong yesterday. It remains wrong today. The constitution has changed, but the facts have not. 
   
  
 Updated at 10.45am BST 
 
 
  10.32am BST  
  
  More pressure is being placed on Northern Ireland over its restrictive abortion law from Clare Murphy, the external affairs director at the British Pregnancy Advisory Service. 
  Irelands voters have shown that denying women the right to abortion services in their own country in 2018 is not acceptable, she said.  
   
   This is a momentous step forward that is long overdue. For decades, Irish women have been forced to travel hundreds of miles to our clinics in England, often alone, at a huge personal and emotional cost.  
   The result, once confirmed, means that the Irish government can bring an end to this suffering, and legislate to provide the care women need at home. Now more than ever it is time for the UK government to show the same respect for the women of Northern Ireland. 
   
  
 Updated at 10.46am BST 
 
 
  10.21am BST  
  
  The Guardians Lisa OCarroll is watching the count in Roscommon, traditionally one of Irelands most conservative counties, and reports that even there, the yes campaign looks to be doing well. 
   
   
    Plenty of yes campaigners with their repeal jumpers here at Roscommon count. Early stages here but so far all tallies Ive spoken to have recorded a lead to yes apart from one rural area. One of 7 Ros town boxes was 201 to 146: another 156 yes to 125 another 91 to 91 pic.twitter.com/nl1Zxo20yS lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 10.26am BST 
 
 
  10.12am BST  
  
  The Irish capital is expected to return one of the highest proportions of yes votes in the country. The Irish Times reports that with 23% of ballot boxes open in Dublin Bay South, 79% are for yes and 21% for no. Dublin Central has 46% of boxes open, with 76% in favour of repealing the eighth and 24% against. 
  
 Updated at 10.27am BST 
 
 
  10.07am BST  
  
  The detail of the RT exit poll shows Ireland has profoundly changed its attitudes towards women, with most voters saying they had made up their minds to repeal abortion laws years ago, reports Lisa OCarroll. 
  It showed little gender difference in voting, with only one in 10 saying they were influenced by posters or religion, and more than 75% saying they had not changed their mind on abortion in the past five years  suggesting support for reform far predated the announcement of a referendum two months ago.  
  Colm OGorman, the head of Amnesty International in Ireland, which campaigned for a yes vote, said expectations had been that the count would be close, but attitude surveys it conducted in 2015 had shown deep changes in thinking on abortion. 
  More than 80% said they had not changed their minds on how they were going to vote during the campaign, and more than three-quarters said they were influenced by personal stories they had heard in the media, or from people they knew. 
  Eight percent said they were influenced by the death of Savita Halappanavar during complications in her pregnancy in Galway in 2015.  
  You can read Lisas full report here. 
  
 Updated at 10.30am BST 
 
 
  9.53am BST  
  
  Last nights Irish Times exit poll showed a whopping 87% of 18 to 24-year-olds supported a yes vote, reports Sinad Baker. 
  The president of the Union of Students in Ireland, Michael Kerrigan, who represents more than 374,000 students, said: 
   
   We are delighted, but not at all surprised by the reported turnout of young people. We had predicted earlier in the week that this would be the largest youth vote in the history of the state, with a large majority voting yes. This is an issue that has been debated on campuses since the mid-1970s and has really intensified in the last couple of years. The exit poll suggests this issue was not as divisive as reported and that repeal was supported across generations. 
   
  The union has been pushing for repeal of the eighth amendment for years, and has been a constant presence at marches and demonstrations. It directly registered more than 25,000 students to vote in the run-up to the referendum. 
  The idea that Ireland is a conservative country seems to be melting away. When it comes to referendums on social issues, Ireland has not voted for the conservative option since 1983.  
  Over that time, both the rural/urban divide and the generation gap have slowly closed. When the country voted in favour of permitting divorce in 1995, it did so by 9,000 votes and only five constituencies outside Dublin voted in favour.  
  In the 2015 plebiscite on same-sex marriage, the rural/urban divide vanished, and cross-generational support was clear  and it looks like this is the case again in 2018. 
  
 Updated at 10.26am BST 
 
 
  9.50am BST  
  
  The expected result in the Irish referendum is likely to put significant pressure on politicians in Northern Ireland to review its highly restrictive regime, reports Harriet Sherwood. 
  If the repeal of the eighth amendment is confirmed and followed by legislation to permit abortion on request up to the 12th week of pregnancy, Northern Ireland will be the only place in the UK and Ireland  and most of Europe  where terminations are outlawed except for the most exceptional circumstances. 
  UK politicians acknowledged that Northern Ireland would come under the spotlight as the exit polls landed. Penny Mordaunt, the international development secretary, who also holds the equalities brief, tweeted: 
   
   
    Based on the exit poll, a historic &amp; great day for Ireland, &amp; a hopeful one for Northern Ireland. That hope must be met. #HomeToVote stories are a powerful and moving testimony as to why this had to happen and that understanding &amp; empathy exists between generations. #trustwomen Penny Mordaunt MP (@PennyMordaunt) 
    May 25, 2018
    
   
  And Owen Smith, the former shadow Northern Ireland secretary, had this to say: 
   
   
    Wonderful news, if true. And a powerful message to Northern Ireland. We need change across the whole island of Ireland. Owen Smith (@OwenSmith_MP) 
    May 25, 2018
    
   
  You can read Harriets full story here. 
  
 Updated at 10.23am BST 
 
 
  9.45am BST  
  
  One of the key cases influencing the debate on abortion in Ireland was that of the Indian dentist Savita Halappanavar, who died of sepsis at a hospital in Galway after being denied an abortion during a protracted miscarriage.  
  Her husband, Praveen Halappanavar, claimed she requested a termination but was refused because the babys heart was still beating.  
  A midwife manager at Galway university hospital confirmed she told Halappanavar a termination could not be carried out because Ireland was a Catholic country.  
   
   
    Flowers and tributes were left at the Dublin mural of Savita Halappanavar, who died in 2012 in an Irish hospital after she was denied an abortion while suffering the complications of a septic miscarriage. Im so sorry. My vote was for you, one note reads. #8thRef pic.twitter.com/b5DRnfZFs9 Sinad Baker (@sineadbaker1) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 10.21am BST 
 
 
  9.37am BST  
  
  Anti-abortion Save the Eighth campaigners had warned extreme legislation would soon follow if the amendment were repealed, but the Irish governments proposed new regime is comparable to that in most European countries and stricter than several. 
  Leah Hoctor, the regional director for Europe at the Center for Reproductive Rights, told Euronews this year that that 25 of the EUs 28 member states permit abortion either on a womens request, without restriction as to reason or for reasons of distress, or on broad socioeconomic or psychological grounds, at least in early pregnancy. 
  Abortion in most European countries is more or less freely available during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. The Irish Times has the full list towards the bottom of its excellent Abortion: the Facts page. 
  
 Updated at 10.20am BST 
 
 
  9.32am BST  
  
  Heres what the count looks like up close, from Sunday Business Hugh OConnell. 
   
   
    A tally sheet from Dublin Central pic.twitter.com/q208ZVUzGZ Hugh O'Connell (@oconnellhugh) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  And the Guardians Lisa OCarroll is at the count in Roscommon. 
   
   
    Count underway in Roscommon. People with pens and paper are the tallies pic.twitter.com/VOzmLfZNG5 lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 10.18am BST 
 
 
  9.30am BST  
  
  So why did the yes campaign win so convincingly? The Guardians Ireland correspondent, Henry McDonald, offers his first take, identifying four key reasons:  
   
   The first is the loss of political power in the pulpit since the early 1990s, when a series of scandals started to beset the Irish Catholic hierarchy. From Archbishop Eamonn Casey raiding the funds of his diocese to look after his lover and his son, to the Irish state trying to prevent the extradition of a serial paedophile priest for his crimes in Northern Ireland, the last decade of the 20th century charted a catastrophic loss of trust and authority on the part of bishops and cardinals.  
   Worse was to come as a raft of public inquiries revealed the industrial scale of sexual and physical abuse, as well as the economic exploitation of young children in the Catholic churchs care. It was telling that by the time of the referendum, the majority of no campaigners on public platforms and media outlets were lay people rather than priests, bishops or cardinals.  
   Secondly, there were the hard cases where the grim realities of abortion choices came up against theological and moral objections  from the 1992 X scandal, where some in the anti-abortion movement wanted to prevent a 14-year-old girl from travelling out of the state to have an abortion after being raped, to the plight of Savita Halappanavar, who died from sepsis in the womb in an Irish hospital six years ago after medics refused to grant her demand for a termination, prompting the UN to denounce the practice of forcing women to leave their country to obtain terminations as cruel and inhumane. 
   Thirdly, there appears to have been an underlying message coming from the doorsteps from most voters. The Irish electorate recognised finally that this referendum was not really about if women were having abortions, but where they were taking place.  
   Yes campaigners reported that the view was commonplace that if women were already having terminations, they might as well have them at home rather than abroad. Irish people had become more pragmatic and less theocratic in the way they viewed the question.  
   Finally, there was the strategic ineptitude of the no camp. Aside from accusations that anti-abortion campaigners were being financed by the American Christian right, there was undoubtedly evidence that they had tried to adopt the electoral tactics of US conservatism, appearing to believe that if the Irish Catholic conservative heartlands could be equally fired up to vote in large numbers, the anti-abortion coalition would have enough to just marginally win. 
   
   
   What they appear to have overlooked is that this base is much thinner and less ideologically inclined than the bible-belt millions of the American south and mid-west. The Irish version is an ageing, declining population. 
   
  
 Updated at 10.18am BST 
 
 
  9.17am BST  
  
  Seismic, stunning, emphatic and overwhelming are some of the words being used to describe the projected result in Irelands abortion referendum on removing a 35-year-old ban from the constitution.With two exit polls from the Irish Times and RT showing about 70% of the country voted yes, the anticipated referendum outcome seems indicative of profound underlying change in Irish society that was taking root long before campaigning started eight weeks ago.  
  Fresh details on the RTE exit poll showed the only group voting to save the eighth amendment were the over-65s. Farmers and rural voters, traditionally considered more conservative, all voted yes. 
   
   
    RTE abortion exit poll - more detailed just released.Only age group to vote no were over 65s. Farmers voted yes as did rural. Over 65s: 41.3% ABC1 class 76.7. yesRural 63.1%Farmers 52.15% yes - Dublin 70%Fine Gael - 74.9%Fianna Fail 49.7% yes lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) 
    May 26, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 10.10am BST 
 
 
  9.12am BST  
  
  The leaders of the main political parties supported a yes vote  but not all of them have their party members behind them, writes Sinad Baker. 
  As taoiseach and the leader of Fine Gael, Leo Varadkar campaigned vocally for repeal, describing abortion in Ireland as unsafe, unregulated and unlawful. He has the support of most of his partys TDs. All Labours TDs supported yes, as did Sinn Fins, in line with the parties official lines. 
  The repeal campaign was bolstered when the leader of Fianna Fil, Michel Martin, came out in favour of yes. The surprise announcement was seen as evidence that a fundamental shift had taken place in Ireland, with Martin saying the eighth amendment has been shown to cause real damage to Irish women. 
  But the majority of his partys elected representatives advocated for a no vote. 
  Such a high level of political support for a change to the constitution would have been unthinkable just a few years ago. But it did allow the no campaign to present itself as having something of an anti-establishment position  despite strong support from many politicians and the Catholic church. 
  
 Updated at 10.09am BST 
 
 
  9.08am BST  
  
  Reaction, too, from Amanda Mellet, one of three Irish women who successfully persuaded the UN to denounce Irelands abortion ban as cruel and inhumane, who says the expected yes vote will represent real closure. 
  Mellet and her husband, James, took a case in 2013 against the Irish government to the UNs human rights committee after the couple were forced to obtain a termination for her pregnancy in England. 
  Had she remained in the Irish Republic, she would have been forced to give birth to a baby who would be born dead, as she was suffering from a fatal foetal abnormality in pregnancy. She also became the first women in Ireland to receive financial compensation from the Irish state. Speaking from Kilkenny, Mellet said:  
   
   Even when we won our case at the UN in June 2016, it never felt like any proper closure for myself or James. We were not even sure back then that the government would even hold a referendum. 
   When James and I voted on Friday morning, it did finally feel like real closure for the both of us. We had campaigned along with so many in the Terminations For Medical Reasons group for change, and now we are, hopefully, going to get it.  
   Whilst I am superstitious normally, I think that it will be a yes vote and for the first time in a very long time, I feel comfortable here in Ireland. We all put so much energy and emotion into the campaign over the years, but now we can say a chapter in our lives is finally closing  if as it looks its going to be yes. 
   
  
 Updated at 10.06am BST 
 
 
  9.05am BST  
  
  What does the eighth amendment actually say  and what would it be replaced by?  
  The eighth amendment was inserted into the Irish constitution after a referendum in 1983. Abortion had been illegal in Ireland since the Offences Against the Person Act of 1861, but with many European countries opting to permit terminations on request until 12 weeks or more, campaigners sought the security of a constitutional amendment. 
  The amendment states: 
   
   The state acknowledges the right to life of the unborn and, with due regard to the equal right to life of the mother, guarantees in its laws to respect, and, as far as practicable, by its laws to defend and vindicate that right. 
   
  If the eighth is repealed, the relevant clause of the constitution  40.3.3  will be replaced by the phrase: 
   
   Provision may be made by law for the regulation of termination of pregnancy. 
   
  
 Updated at 10.04am BST 
 
 
  9.05am BST  
  
  Reactions to the exit polls  which forecast a far wider margin of victory for the yes vote that was widely expected  have been coming in thick and fast, starting late last night. 
  Heres the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar: 
   
   
    Thank you to everyone who voted today. Democracy in action. Its looking like we will make history tomorrow.... #Together4Yes Leo Varadkar (@campaignforleo) 
    May 25, 2018
    
   
  And the health minister, Simon Harris: 
   
   
     will sleep tonight in the hope of waking up to a country that is more compassionate, more caring and more respectful. It has been an honour to be on this journey with you and to work #togetherforyes . See you all tomorrow! Simon Harris TD (@SimonHarrisTD) 
    May 25, 2018
    
   
  And the leader of the no campaign, John McGuirk: 
   
   
    The 8th did not create an unborn child's right to life - it merely acknowledged it. The right exists, independent of what a majority says. That said, with a result of that magnitude, clearly there was very little to be done. Thank you to every NO voter and campaigner. #8thref John McGuirk (@john_mcguirk) 
    May 25, 2018
    
   
  And the actor and comedian Aisling Bea, a leading light in the yes campaign: 
   
   
    pic.twitter.com/B1TqoxNU3B Aisling YES TO REPEAL Bea (@WeeMissBea) 
    May 25, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 10.03am BST 
 
 
  8.57am BST  
  
  Hello and welcome to the Guardians live coverage on what looks set to be a historic day for Ireland as votes are counted in its abortion referendum. 
  Last nights shock exit polls suggested a landslide vote for change, with an overwhelming majority of voters backing the repeal of a 1983 constitutional amendment that has led to one of the strictest abortion regimes in the world. 
  An Irish Times/Ipsos poll forecast a margin of 68% to 32% in favour of repealing the eighth amendment, while a poll for the national broadcaster RT predicted an even bigger margin of 69.4% to 30.6%.  
  Turnout was on course to be one of the highest for a referendum in Ireland, possibly topping the 61% who voted in the plebiscite that backed same-sex marriage in 2015.  
  Acknowledging an equal right to life for both the unborn child and the mother, the eighth amendment effectively prohibited termination in almost all cases, including rape, incest or fatal foetal abnormality. 
  Abortion when a mothers life is at risk has been permitted since 2013, but in all other circumstances, doctors performing unlawful abortions face up to 14 years in prison. 
  As a result, about 3,500 Irish women have travelled abroad, mostly to the UK, each year to terminate their pregnancies, and an estimated 2,000 more buy abortion pills online, administering them at home without medical supervision. 
  If the exit polls prove accurate and the eighth amendment is repealed, the government plans to table a new law allowing abortion on request during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Terminations will be permitted up to 24 weeks if the womens health is threatened. 
  We will be bringing you live reports, analysis and reaction through the day until the result is confirmed (its expected some time this afternoon), including from our reporters @lisaocarroll  @_EmmaGH @sineadbaker1  and @henrymcdonald.  
  
 Updated at 10.02am BST 
"
"138""The equality campaigner Christie Elan-Cane has lost a high court challenge against the UK governments refusal to issue gender-neutral, or X, passports.  Mr Justice Jeremy Baker upheld Home Office policy after the court was told it would affect other legislation, cost too much to change computer records and increase the need for consular support abroad for gender-neutral British citizens. Elan-Cane, who has pursued the issue for more than 25 years, has claimed that non-gendered people suffer discrimination and are being deprived of their legitimate identity. UK passports restrict sex designations to male or female. Ten countries permit their citizens to opt for a third category, X, or unknown.  Canada was the most recent to offer its citizens gender-neutral passports. Other country that allow a third option are Australia, Denmark, Germany, Malta, New Zealand, Pakistan, India, Ireland and Nepal. X passports are approved by the ICAO, the UN agency that regulates international air travel. During the hearing, Kate Gallafent QC, for Elan-Cane, argued that HM Passport Office policy breaches the right to respect for private life, and the right not to be discriminated against on the basis of gender or sex, under the European convention on human rights (ECHR).  She said: For the claimant, obtaining and using a passport currently involves making a false declaration as to the nature of the claimants gender identity, which causes the claimant considerable distress.  Sir James Eadie QC, on behalf of the home secretary, submitted that the policy did not interfere with rights under the ECHR.  He argued that if the policy constituted an interference with article 8  the right to respect for private life  it was justified by the need to maintain an administratively coherent system for the recognition of gender, to maintain security and to combat identity theft and fraud, and to ensure security at national borders. In his decision, Baker said: The government is currently collecting and collating research material with a view to undertaking a comprehensive review of the issues both surrounding and those raised directly by the claimant in this case  [Elan-Cane] will be entitled to scrutinise with care the results of the governments current review, which will be required to be undertaken without any undue delay. Elan-Cane said: I am bitterly disappointed that my case for the judicial review of the UK governments discriminatory passport policy was not upheld. Not just for myself but for everyone who is compromised by this policy.  The UKs passport application process requires applicants to declare whether they are male or female. It is inappropriate and wrong that someone who defines as neither should be forced to make that declaration. Elan-Cane, who was represented pro-bono by the law firm Clifford Chance, is considering whether or not to appeal.  Narind Singh, a partner at the firm, said: Gender identity is a fundamental part of an individuals intimate, personal identity and X passports are a crucial step in the protection of the human rights of this group of individuals, who otherwise face an unacceptable choice between forgoing a passport, and making a false declaration, and using a passport which misrepresents their identity. We are considering with Christie the possibility of seeking leave to appeal todays judgment. We will continue to assist Christie in this fight. We welcome the courts ruling that Christie will be entitled to scrutinise the outcome of the review that the government is undertaking, and we will continue to assist Christie to hold the government to account. Tom Mountford, a barrister who also represented Elan-Cane, said: In this decision, the UK courts have, for the first time, recognised that the right to respect for an individuals private life, guaranteed by article 8 of the European convention on human rights, includes the right to respect for the fundamental identity of non-gendered, intersex, trans and non-binary people identifying as neither, or not exclusively, male or female. "
"139""Leonne Zeegers was five years old, splashing in the familys bathtub with her siblings, when her sister shrieked and giggled at the something between my legs. It was the first time Zeegers remembers feeling different. My sister was eight then, she said eh, youre a boy! and I was crying because I didnt want to be a boy, I wanted to be like my sisters. Zeegers was born intersex in 1961, in the picturesque village of Swallen on the German-Dutch border, to Catholic parents who worked as an architect and a housekeeper at the local church. I was born in two sexes, she explains. I call it hermaphrodite, because for me thats most clear. My parents didnt want to operate on me and so they raised me up as Leon, a boy. It was no problem because I was a very strong boy, everyone accepted me, and nobody had to look between my legs. Nobody knew then. She shrugs. Sometimes I acted a little bit female but often I was playing the tough guy, I was macho. Last Monday, Zeegers became the first Dutch citizen to win the legal right to identify as neither male nor female, urging legislators to recognise a third gender. Limburg district court in Roermond, in the south of the Netherlands, ruled that although Zeegers was raised as a boy and underwent surgery in 2001 to be legally recognised as female, her personality is experienced as gender-neutral, feeling like neither a man nor a women. Zeegers represented herself in the two-year-long case and had to submit extraordinary amounts of evidence, including anatomically explicit photographs, to secure her victory. Today, at home in her three-storey townhouse in the centre of Breda overlooking the park, Zeegers fans herself against the muggy heat. She wears bright jewellery and subtle makeup against a polka dot top and cream palazzo trousers, her hair whipped up and pinned. Having lived as a women for the past 17 years, she is comfortable using female pronouns rather than they or them but describes herself as gender-fluid. My breasts are real, my skin is smooth, I dont have a beard or take hormones but now I am 57. I have lived life on both sides; sometimes I feel as a man, sometimes I feel as a women, sometimes I dont feel anything. Quoting Wikipedia, Zeegers believes that one in every 1,000 births is like hers  babies of indeterminate sex  and that after the Greeks, hermaphrodites were erased. We didnt use that term any more and put it away and pretended it didnt exist. But we exist, always.    Sex is between your legs, gender is between your ears. The body is just a suitcase for carrying your gender    She sets to work preparing a plate of crumpets and strawberries, while revealing the most intimate details of her life, because as she puts it being honest and open is how things change. I dont want the publicity of my picture out there because then everyone recognises you and talks about you but I am mentally and physically strong to take this on. Zeegers has worked as a trainee nurse, an insurance agent and, until relatively recently, a BDSM (bondage, discipline and sadomasochism) mistress. She was a champion athlete and was competing to make the mens national Olympic swimming team in the 1990s but was thrown out after taking testosterone for the first time. She made a fortune from buying and letting out properties in her 20s, but had sold her business by the age of 35 to spend the next five years travelling the world  mostly Asia, Africa and Indonesia  to find people like her and to understand herself better. When I came back, I started training as a psychotherapist, she says. I thought I could heal and treat myself. It was then I decided to change  in a couple of weeks I was a women. It cant have been an uncomplicated business. Zeegers also got married at 24 to a women, which she describes as her most significant relationship, and fathered a child. The couple divorced eight years later and she maintains a close relationship with her son  the dining table is covered with photo albums, including a recent one from his wedding  although, she says, the familys discovery of her becoming a sex worker in her 40s was trickier to handle than her gender transition. My mother is still alive but both my parents grew up on farms. A lot of animals are born without a sex and for them, the way I was born was not a big thing, she says. Sometimes when I was very very unhappy I couldnt be like other girls or boys, my mother would just tell me I was an angel. Owning and running Paradise, then one of Bredas most notorious BDSM clubs, was less welcome. Were Catholic, she murmurs. So yes, anything different compared to the norm should be kept quiet, in the family, under the rug. It was working as a mistress paid 200 an hour where Zeegers says she met and had relationships with judges, ministers, very many high-ranking government people that helped build her landmark case. She opens a lever-arch file full of memorabilia and bondage photos. I had 12 mistresses working for me, I had the biggest mistress company here. There were police raids and pressure from journalists digging for stories on the clubs members, but Zeegers eventually called time on the business in the late 2000s because I did not like it, she says. I dont like BDSM, its not my thing, Im a normal person who likes nice and soft intimacy; I dont like hitting people but if I can help someone by hitting them, OK. But I was also a therapist, they would tell me their life stories and everyone came to me because I kept my mouth shut. I have photos of [clients] too  that danger was like a thrill to them. In her teens, however, she was understandably terrified of sex. I was attracted to men and women but I didnt know how  She pauses. Im lucky Ive never been hurt or there has not been violence  nobody would dare, I am so strong! Getting a job at a hospital at 17, for four years, became an education. I met a lot of girls. We had a hospital bar and I danced with all the girls and because I was very good at that, girls assumed I must be very good in bed. Then known as Leon and presenting as male, Zeegers says it was probably her most promiscuous, exploratory spell. I always told them my story beforehand. The first girl I was with said Oh, I think my vagina is very strange and if you like that, Ill like you. Zeegers hopes her case has a ripple effect on social and legal attitudes, but downplays its success. A lot of people came to me that I know would be helped by [the court ruling] and I was in a position that I knew a lot of judges. I talked to them and got advice on how to change the law and I found out exactly how to do it. My case is important but even the court has made mistakes. How so? Because the court in Holland has declared it is time to recognise a third gender  it is not time to have a third gender, its time to have a third sex. For Zeegers, the conversation around the meaning of gender is important but biological determination is crucial. Sex is between your legs, gender is between your ears, she says. Gender is your mind. For me, the body is just a suitcase for carrying your gender, that is how I see it. Gender is everything between the spectrum of male and female and if you want to be a masculine women, thats OK. If youre a man wanting to wear skirts and makeup, that is OK. Thats my opinion and I realise not everyone ready is for it. In the parallel debate around trans identity, Zeegers believes social progress must be achieved with patience and stoicism. You cant do it so quick, she says. People need time, I needed time  I needed time to know myself because I wasnt sure and its confrontational to throw this at people and expect them to understand very quickly. They wont. They have no experience of this. But isnt she tired of waiting for acceptance? Thats why I am open and talk about my experience, she says, quietly. Because if you stay quiet there are more problems; I give up my vulnerability and it becomes like a shield."
"140""Spains new socialist prime minister has appointed 11 women and six men to his cabinet, saying his new government is unmistakably committed to equality and intends to reflect recent changes in Spanish society. Announcing his choices at a press conference on Wednesday evening, Pedro Snchez said his would be the first majority-female cabinet since Spain returned to democracy following the death of Gen Francisco Franco in 1975. This is a highly qualified government for a society with equal representation, open to the world but anchored in Europe, he said. The prime minister, who was sworn in on Saturday, said the nationwide feminist strike on 8 March had marked a before and an after when it came to gender equality in Spain, adding: The new government is a faithful reflection of that movement.   Related: Spanish newspaper El Pas appoints its first gender correspondent    His appointments include Carmen Calvo, a former culture minister, who will serve as deputy prime minister and equalities minister, and Nadia Calvio  currently budget director general at the European commission  who will take the role of economy minister.  Dolores Delgado, a prosecutor specialising in human rights and terrorism cases, will become justice minister. Barcelona-born Meritxell Batet will be tasked with handling the Catalan independence crisis in her new role as territorial minister, while the former European parliament president Josep Borrell will be the new foreign minister. Borrell, who was born in Catalonia and was a minister in the PSOE government of Felipe Gonzlez, has been an outspoken critic of Catalan independence. Snchezs other ministers include an astronaut and a journalist. Earlier on Wednesday, it emerged that the prime minister had chosen Pedro Duque, a 55-year-old veteran of two space missions, to serve as minister for science, innovation and universities in his new administration.   Related: Rajoy is gone. Can Pedro Snchez tackle the corruption plaguing Spain? | Giles Tremlett    Duque, who left Earth in 1998 and again in 2003, responded to his appointment on Twitter, saying he wished his mother was still alive to see it. Beneath it, he posted a cartoon of a women seeing her son off to work and telling him: Remember, son, important jobs are the devils playground. Spains new culture and sports minister will be the journalist and author Mxim Huerta. Snchez, 46, a former economics professor, managed to unseat his conservative predecessor, Mariano Rajoy, through a no-confidence vote held last week in protest against corruption within Rajoys party. The cabinet in full  Carmen Calvo Deputy prime minister and equality minister Josep Borrell Foreign minister Nadia Calvio Economy minister Dolores Delgado Justice minister Margarita Robles Defence minister Mara Jess Montero Finance minister Fernando Grande-Marlaska Interior minister Jos Lus balos Public works minister Isabel Cela Education and government spokeswomen Pedro Duque Minister of science, innovation and universities Mxim Huerta Culture and sports minister Meritxell Batet Minister for territorial policy and civil service Magdalena Valerio Minister for employment, migration and social security Reyes Maroto Industry, commerce and tourism minister Luis Planas Agriculture, fisheries and food minister Teresa Ribera Ecological transition minister Carmen Monton Health and social wellbeing minister "
"141""women rights activists in Peru have expressed outrage after the countrys president responded to the murder of a women who was burned to death by a stalker by saying sometimes thats how life is.  Eyvi Agreda died on Friday from infections caused by the attack in April which left 60% of her body covered in second and third-degree burns.  Agredas assailant, Carlos Hualpa, doused her with petrol on a bus and set her alight, telling her: If you arent mine then youll be nobodys. According to her family, he had harassed her for two years, but police had not responded to her complaints. Late on Friday, Perus president Martn Vizcarra offered his sympathies to Agredas family and demanded a life sentence for Hualpa  but then provoked widespread fury by adding: Sometimes thats how life is and we have to accept it.    Eyvi was killed by Carlos Hualpa but also machismo in the state and in society  Veronika Mendoza     On Saturday,  women rights protesters from the NiUnaMenos movement were teargassed by police as they demonstrated outside the countrys judiciary demanding justice in femicide cases and an end to impunity. Veronika Mendoza, a former presidential candidate and leader of the leftist Nuevo Peru party, tweeted: No, Mr Martin Vizcarra, this is not how life is. Eyvi was killed by Carlos Hualpa but also machismo in the state and in society. Promote policies with a gender focus to prevent and eradicate violence, dont let them keep killing us; its in your hands, she wrote.   n Vizcarra, the president of Peru, has drawn sharp criticism.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  The comment by Martn Vizcarra, the president of Peru, has drawn sharp criticism. Photograph: Ernesto Arias/EPA    Vizcarra announced the police stations would be on 24-hour alert and he would set up an emergency committee but women rights movements say a state of emergency should be declared across the country over the level of violence against women.    Related: Miss Peru contestants accuse country of not measuring up on gender violence    Declaring an alert is OK but if its not converted into funding and policies in which sex education includes gender equality there will be little change, said Rossina Guerrero, the programme director at Promsex. Regrettably, this president has ceded to the ultra-conservatives and doesnt want to talk about the structural causes of violence against women like machismo, she said.  The political right, which dominates Perus congress, has allied with evangelical groups and sectors of the Catholic church, to force the amendment of the school curriculum which, they claim, promotes same-sex relationships through gender ideology. Rights groups argue this move rolls back the teaching of gender equality and perpetuates sexist attitudes which, ultimately, leads to higher levels of gender violence and rape. Nearly 20% of Peruvian prisoners are in jail for sex crimes, particularly the sexual abuse of minors, according the countrys justice ministry. [Vizcarra] is making political calculations at the cost of women lives, Guerrero added. There were 43 femicides and 103 attempted femicides in the first four months of 2018, according to women ministry statistics, a rise of 26.4% compared the same period last year."
"142""Irish feminists buoyed by victory in the abortion referendum have their sights set on removing a section of the constitution which refers to women place in the home. The clause has no direct legal implications in contemporary Ireland, but politicians and activists have long argued that its archaic and sexist language undermines women. Commonly known as the women in the home clause, its existence constitutionally relegates women to second class citizenship, the Sinn Fin leader, Mary Lou McDonald, said in 2015.   Related: Ireland moves forward with abortion law reform after historic vote    Article 41.2 of the constitution says the Irish state recognises that by her life within the home, women gives to the state a support without which the common good cannot be achieved. The state shall, therefore, endeavour to ensure that mothers shall not be obliged by economic necessity to engage in labour to the neglect of their duties in the home. A constitutional conference in 2013 recommended change, and when the prime minister, Leo Varadkar, took office last year he promised it would be one of the issues put to citizens in a referendum.  The vote could be as early as October, potentially alongside the presidential election. Options include removing the clause entirely, or replacing it with a gender-neutral reference to the work of carers. Although the change is likely to be largely unopposed, many hope the debate about its removal will offer a chance to discuss wider issues around women status and gender inequality. Its continued existence, even as a constitutional dead letter, is symbolic of the latent sexism we dont like to admit still informs our society, Niamh Egleston, a law student in Dublin, said. Some, however, argue that the vote on the clause should only come after the battle for abortion rights has been completed by passing legislation approved in principle last week. Of course [the women in the home clause] should be repealed as it is a archaic throwback, said Brd Smith, a lawmaker with the People Before Profit party. But, she added, calling another referendum before we have finished the work needed to make sure women dont have to travel abroad or purchase [abortion] pills illegally would be a mistake.   s prime minister, Leo Varadkar, at Dublin castle\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Leo Varadkar has pledged to put calls for the removal of the women in the home clause to a public vote. Photograph: Niall Carson/PA    The Proclamation of the Republic, read out during the 1916 rebellion, was addressed to Irishmen and Irishwomen, an overt reference to gender equality. Irish women gained full voting rights in 1922. The first women elected as a member of the House of Commons in Westminster was the Irish revolutionary Constance Georgine Markievicz, in 1918, although as a member of Sinn Fin she refused to take up her seat. In the following decades, laws and traditions left women restricted, both in the workforce and wider society, with marriage and motherhood seen by many as being incompatible with a career. When the 1937 constitution was being drawn up under amon de Valera, who would go on to become taoiseach, feminists accused him of trying to erode Irish women political and social achievements. Mr de Valera has always been a reactionary where women are concerned, Gertrude Gaffney, a reporter for the Irish Independent, wrote in 1937. He dislikes and distrusts us as a sex and his aim ever since he came into office has been to put us into what he considers is our place and keep us there. Restrictions included a bar on married women working in the public sector, which was only removed in 1973; and a married man could mortgage or sell a family home without his wifes knowledge or consent.   Related: 'Savita! Savita! Savita!': why the Irish abortion vote touched women the world over | Van Badham    By 2016, more than half of adult women were working, but the gender pay gap is still around 15%, and one in 10 board members at listed companies are women. Since the abortion referendum, activists are focusing on issues such as the gender pay gap, sub-par sex education and the cost of contraception as ways to continue improving gender equality."
"143""We are four months into our Upside series, tracking down stories from around the world of problems tackled, trends bucked and hopes renewed. Weve been overwhelmed by the responses from readers, particularly those of you who have been motivated to get involved  by joining a campaign group, making a donation or even drafting a policy paper.  So this week we thought we would ask: have you been inspired to take action by the series? Let us know what youve been up to by emailing us at theupside@theguardian.com, and we might follow up for a future story. Back to our roundup: this year has been dominated by the global reckoning around gender relations, with #MeToo, the gender pay gap, parental leave and violence towards women all proving major talking points. This weeks stories reflect the evolution of that worldwide upheaval, from maternal mortality in rural India and sexual assault in Mongolia to parental equality in Canada.      Saranzaya Chambuu, whose sister alleges she was raped by an MP. Photograph: Byamba Ochir/MPA for the Guardian    The more time that fathers spend caring for their infants, the better it is for the children and for gender equality. But almost everywhere, take-up rates for parental leave among men are abysmal. In Quebec, a bold plan has seen the problem cracked; it has been deemed such a success that it will soon be rolled out nationwide. Mireille Silcoff reports from Montreal on how they did it. Meanwhile in Mongolia, 31% of women say they have been subjected to sexual or physical violence by a partner, while one in seven says they have experienced sexual violence outside their relationship  twice the estimated world average. Now a high-profile rape allegation against a politician has prompted a fightback among a growing women rights movement, as Lily Kuo discovered in Ulaanbaatar. Parts of rural India have long had a serious problem with women dying in childbirth, with some of the worst mortality rates in the world. A group of Indians living abroad decided something should be done to empower women. The Save a Mother initiative has had remarkable success, and Amrit Dhillon visited the village of Purabgaon in northern India to find out more.  What we liked: This Wired story looks at Los Angeless aqueous awakening as the city finds new ways to source, store and use water. What we heard:  Such a breath of fresh air! In Australia, dads get two weeks off work, but really, its not enough. Five weeks would allow time for fathers to bond with the baby and support the mum, who is recovering from the equivalent of a major operation/health event, as well as waking up every two hours all night long to breastfeed, so is extremely sleep deprived. Commenter bonobo123 writing below the line about Quebecs parental leave policy  Where was the upside? In Indonesia, the worlds largest Muslim-majority nation and one of the worlds biggest marine polluters, the government has joined forces with the countrys two largest Islamic organisations to encourage consumers to reduce plastic waste and reuse plastic bags.      Gita Gupta, far left, of the Save a Mother project with Seema Agrahari, in red, and her children in the village of Purabgaon, where maternal deaths in childbirth have been drastically reduced. Photograph: Amrit Dhillon       Want to get the Upside weekly report emailed direct to you? Sign up here   If there is a story, innovation or trailblazer you think we should report on, write to us at theupside@theguardian.com."
"144""Theresa Mays efforts to tackle racial disparity in public services are being hampered by poor data-gathering in Whitehall, MPs have warned. The House of Commons women and equalities committee welcomed the launch of the prime ministers groundbreaking race disparity audit after she entered Downing Street in 2016, but said that without robust ethnicity data, government departments would remain ignorant of the uncomfortable truths they were supposed to be addressing. Among the findings of its first report, published in October 2017, were that:  Chinese and Asian secondary school pupils outperformed their white and black counterparts; Black men were more than three times as likely to be arrested as white men; The unemployment rate for black, Asian and minority ethnic people was nearly double that of white British adults. However, the committee said that without consistent data departments would struggle to develop the policies needed to address such inequalities.   Related: Ethnic minorities more likely to be jailed for some crimes, report finds    It is clear that public services are not currently collecting ethnicity data in a streamlined fashion and that some agencies are not collecting data at all, it said. Clear and measurable plans are needed for improving the consistency and robustness of the data and turning it into a set of cross-government priorities for action to reduce the disparities shown by the audit. The committees chair, Maria Miller, said: We strongly commend the principle and sound intentions of the race disparity audit. As the prime minister has said herself, it has helped expose many uncomfortable truths. However, the picture at present is that data collection across different areas of government and public services is inconsistent, not properly joined up and in some cases just isnt happening. That isnt good enough. A Cabinet Office spokeswomen said: This government is determined to build a society that works for everyone and we have not shied away from exposing uncomfortable truths that need to be addressed. It is encouraging that the committee has recognised the race disparity audit as an exemplary programme for tackling injustices.  The government has already taken action to address disparities it highlighted, and will set out in its response to the committee how it will continue to do so as we build a fairer society for everyone."
"145""Who was there? The G7 is attended by the leaders of the seven main western economies, and has been seen as a chance for world leaders to discuss the chief diplomatic and economic issues of the day. Leaders from the US, France, Canada, Germany Japan, Italy and the UK attend. EU officials also attend, as do chiefs from multilateral bodies such as the IMF. Russia used to attend the event, but it was blackballed following the 2014 annexation of Crimea. Since its inception in 1975, its tone is supposed to be gentle  as much fireside chat as firefighting. A G7 shibboleth is support for free trade, and a rules-based world order.    Related: Trump, Merkel, Macron: the G7 photos worth a thousand words    What was said? Donald Trumps now infamous blow-up occurred as much before and after the summit, as during it. In the run-up, the US president announced he was slapping tariffs on EU steel and aluminium, called for Russia to be re-invited to the summit and then derided the World Trade Organization, the body that polices trade. Trump, his mind evidently on his upcoming summit with North Korea, showed his disdain by arriving late for key sessions, such as on gender equality, and leaving early, avoiding the climate change session, giving him a chance to hold a press conference before the hosts to ensure his account of the summit broke first.  In essence, he said he had nothing personal against other world leaders, but the generosity of previous US presidents had left him with the unpleasant task of requiring Europe and Canada to stop ripping America off.     Trump attends a G7 and Gender Equality Advisory Council meeting on 9 June, with IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde and German Chancellor Angela Merkel Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters    Despite personal relations with other leaders being at a level of 10 out of 10, he said: Were like the piggy bank that everybody is robbing... Its going to stop now or well stop trading with them [other nations]. The tone was that of a man in possession of incontrovertible proof of a decades-long European heist. The gig is up, he said.  If his relationship with Justin Trudeau was at 10 at the summit, it fell to zero when Trump  30,000ft up in Air Force One  became infuriated by an account of the Canadian prime ministers closing press conference. In a two-tweet tirade he accused Trudeau of making false statements, adding he was dishonest and weak, and only appeared meek and mild. He declared he was un-signing the communique. His advisers then took the insults to the next level. Larry Kudlow, the presidents economic adviser, said Trudeaus comments were a betrayal and that he had stabbed us in the back. Trump is not going to let a Canadian prime minister push him around. Peter Navarro, the presidents trade adviser, was even harsher: Theres a special place in hell for any foreign leader that engages in bad-faith diplomacy with President Donald J Trump and then tries to stab him in the back on the way out the door. Did Trudeau miscalculate? Reporters at Trudeaus Saturday press conference, including from the New York Times, thought Trudeau went out of his way to be emollient about Trump, content he had cajoled Trump into signing the joint communique. He understood his role as host and co-ordinator. In probably his most aggressive remark, he said Canada was not going to be pushed around, and added he found it insulting that the US had justified extra tariffs on Canada by labelling its neighbour and military ally a security risk. Trump took this as evidence that Trudeau was two-faced. His judgment, presumably, is that his political base cannot get enough of the president standing up for America. Does Trump have a point about Canada and the EU? US tariffs are lower than those of the EU and Canada but the difference is marginal. WTO statistics show that the EUs average trade-weighted tariff was 3% in 2015, the latest year for which this figure was available. Canadas average trade-weighted tariff was 3.1% compared with 2.4% for the US. The US also has a trade surplus with Canada. At best, Trump is being pointlessly selective with his facts, ignoring the complex trade-offs, and taking no account of how his own policies feed a US consumer boom.   Related: G7 in disarray after Trump rejects communique and attacks 'weak' Trudeau    What are the wider implications? The US and the EU have had innumerable previous rows about trade, but right now on climate change, Iran, Nato, Russia and trade, the president is willing not just to differ with the rest of the west, but to challenge and undermine it.  A horrified European political establishment sees Trump, like Vladimir Putin, backing the populists of Europe, especially in eastern Europe, Austria and Italy. These are forces that threaten the liberal order in a way that Emmanuel Macron, Theresa May and Angela Merkel are only beginning to understand. The former UK Foreign Office permanent secretary Simon Fraser for instance sounded genuinely alarmed when he tweeted: Conventional wisdom is that Trump is a blip &amp; normal service will one day be resumed. This is too complacent. The deeper, even more worrying question: are US values, priorities &amp; interests fundamentally diverging from Europe? We should be seriously worried by what has just happened in G7. The Europeans answer lies in managing Trump, including at the imminent Nato summit, but also strengthening Europes economic and security independence. But these are painstaking tasks, requiring long talks between German and French finance ministers, and discussion of a new European strategic defence culture."
"146""When Daniel Goldsmiths first son was born in Quebec in 2013, he took the newborn on a trip to Colorado Springs, the US town in which he grew up.  
 
  Related: Want men to share parental leave? Just give them equality | Duncan Fisher  
 
Id smile at a mother in a coffee shop, because her baby was the same age as mine, just weeks old, he recalls. And then shed tell me she was going back to work the following week. 
Goldmith, a humanities teacher in Montreal, spoke to old friends about their experiences with babies and work. It just sounded like the definition of insanity: mothers going back to work two weeks after a baby was born; fathers taking two days off. 
The 35-year-old had emigrated to Canada with his wife, Giulia Zaccagnini, a few years earlier. He took advantage of a Quebec social policy unheard of anywhere else in North America: a programme of extended non-transferable paternity leave at 70-75% pay offered by the government.  
 Most of my [male] colleagues at work are somewhere between 28 and 40, and I dont know of a single one in the department whos had a kid who has not taken those weeks of paternity leave, says Goldsmith. If something generous like this is being offered, you dont say no. 
 
  
  
   
     
    
    News doesn't always have to be bad  indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do.
    This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come.
    Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com
    
   
  
  
 
 
 &nbsp; 
 
  Sign up here for weekly email updates from this series
  
 
In the family of Canadas provinces and territories, Quebec has long been the noisy, rebellious child. In 2006, it divorced itself from the countrys complex and lacklustre parental leave programme. The province created its own system, the Quebec Parental Insurance Plan (QPIP), a model influenced by Scandinavian countries and with the aim of improving gender equality. 
Along with Quebecs highly subsidised daycare system  the envy of parents across the rest of Canada, with rates as low as C$7.55 (4.35) per day per child  QPIP was seeded in the 1990s by the controversial separatist leader Pauline Marois, then Quebecs minister of families.  
Marois is a feminist and fiercely determined, says Sophie Mathieu, a post-doctoral fellow at Brock University who researches the Quebec parental leave system. As a province, Quebec went from being the laggard in gender equality  Quebec was the last Canadian province to give women the vote  to being the leader. 
 
 s popular parental leave policy.\" width=\"500\" height=\"500\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  Pauline Marois, who championed Quebecs popular parental leave policy. 
  Photograph: Christinne Muschi/Reuters 
  
 
QPIP gave parents higher replacement rates  70-75% of ones income, over a maximum 52 weeks  than other Canadian provinces, while offering more flexibility in terms of shared leave. But the most innovative aspect of QPIP is its daddy quota  the five weeks of use-it-or-lose-it benefits, for fathers and non-biological mothers in lesbian couples. 
There is so much working against fathers when it comes to leave, says Andrea Doucet, the Canada Research Chair in Gender, Work &amp; Care. Fathers go into work and say they want to take leave, and their bosses say: Well isnt your wife taking leave? Fathers were being penalised for taking leave, all the stuff that women have been going through for so long. 
What they found in places like Sweden is that if you give fathers their own leave, something families will lose if they dont take, taking the leave becomes expected. 
Among fathers in Quebec, the effect was close to immediate, with take-up rates among eligible dads jumping 250%. Over 80% of Quebec fathers take their paternity leave, says Doucet.  
And 86% of Quebec parents will also in some way share the rest of their parental leave. Compare that with the 15% of fathers who take parental benefits in the rest of Canada, and the estimated 2% of parents who use the shared parental leave programme in the UK, and the results of what some policy experts have called the Quebec experiment begin to seem quite stunning. 
Globally the picture is even starker. Almost two-thirds of the worlds children under a year old  nearly 90 million infants  live in countries where fathers are not legally entitled to a single day of paid paternity leave, according to new research by Unicef.  
Ankita Patnaik, an economist at Mathematica Policy Research in Washington DC, authored one of the first papers studying QPIP. She says the programme quickly showed results with regards to time use between couples. I found that the mothers having babies in Quebec under QPIP were spending more time in paid work one to three years after having their children, she says.  
Whats more, Patnaik found that fathers who made use of QPIP were engaging in more childcare and domestic work one to three years later than fathers who did not  37 minutes more per day, on average. 
 
  
  
  Daniel Goldsmith and Giulia Zaccagnini walk to the park with their children in Montreal. 
  Photograph: Christinne Muschi for the Guardian 
  
 
Doucet, who has studied fatherhood for two decades, says that the true worth of Quebec fathers spending more time with their babies is still difficult to reflect in numbers. The real question is: later on when the child is sick, who is going to care for the kid? Weve seen  that when fathers build their confidence, competence, love and the feeling that they are an equal parent, then when things go wrong, its not always the mother [who takes responsibility].  
While five weeks of leave is a good step in this direction, its just one step, she adds. 
Goldsmith, who also used shared parental benefits to take months-long leaves for both his young sons, believes that men caring for their babies in the early weeks of their life has a significant and continuing benefit for family life.  
Its different for dads. Mums have an automatic bond but dads have to earn it. And then when you start getting reactions from your babies, it makes you want to be more involved, he says.  
I want to care for my kids, not because of some abstract theoretical notion of sharing 50/50. My son smiles when I smile, he smiles when he sees me. So I do things for love. Love becomes the reason. 
In Canada, that love is spreading. In the 2018 budget, we have introduced an additional parental sharing benefit of five weeks, says the families minister, Jean-Yves Duclos. This is directly related to this very successful experiment in the province of Quebec.  
We know its policies like this that will help us achieve a more equal and inclusive society. These are the kind of policies we want. Not the kind that build walls. Here in Canada, we prefer bridges. 
This article is part of a series on possible solutions to some of the worlds most stubborn problems. What else should we cover? Email us at theupside@theguardian.com 
 
 This article was updated on 19 June to clarify that the five weeks of use-it-or-lose-it benefits offered by Quebec are available to fathers and non-biological mothers in lesbian couples. 
"
"147""Donald Trump has met the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, in a highly choreographed setting in Singapore. Here are five things we learned from the first moments of the first ever meeting between a sitting US president and a North Korean leader. 
 
  Related: Trump-Kim summit: meeting begins as US and North Korean leaders shake hands  live  
 
1. Flags 
 The US and North Korean flags were lined up in an alternating pattern as the world waited for the two men to shake hands and pose for the cameras. The imagery was striking and a big win for Kim, who has worked to appear as an equal to the US president. 
2. Choreography 
Trump left his hotel first but arrived about seven minutes after Kim. The North Korean leaders earlier arrival was reportedly a sign of respect to the older US president. The two men walked out together, with Trump extending his hand first.  
3. The handshake 
In what will surely be on the front pages of newspapers around the world, Trump and Kim shook hands in front of the flags of the two countries. The two men tried to speak to each other, but it ended awkwardly. Kim greeted Trump by saying Nice to meet you, Mr. President in English, according to South Korean media and based on reading his lips. The shake lasted 12 seconds, not nearly as long as Trumps epic 26-second handshake with Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe. Trump was restrained in his grip, declining to do his signature arm yank, and tenderly gripped Kims elbow during the 12-second handshake.  
 
  Related: Kim and Trump meet in Singapore  in pictures  
 
4. Language 
Trump described meeting Kim as an honour and said he had no doubt the two would have a tremendous relationship. At the same time, Kim acknowledged old prejudices and practices that kept US-North Korea relations frozen for decades.  
5. Alone Time 
Trump and Kim emerged from about 40 minutes of discussions between the two of them and their translators, with the US president describing the pair as having an excellent relationship. Trump previously said he would be able to tell in one minute if Kim was sincere about giving up his nuclear weapons. "
"148""Police forces routinely presume Traveller communities are more likely to be the perpetrators of crime than its victims, a report by a community campaign group has found. In a new report based on freedom of information requests and a survey of 43 police forces, the Traveller Movement says police forces may be in breach of the law by employing traveller community liaison officers whose job descriptions focus on enforcement and detection of crime rather than being points of contact for Gypsy, Romany and Irish Traveller people needing the polices help. The group called for an investigation by the Equality and Human Rights Commission after finding what it said was evidence that the police role of Gypsy, Traveller Liaison Officer (GTLOs) may contravene equality laws. Out of 20 job descriptions for the roles at various forces, 12 mentioned enforcement against unauthorised encampments or place Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities alongside thematic issues such as anti-social behaviour, gangs and youth violence.   Related: Italy's treatment of Roma people rooted in centuries-old prejudice    Among the job descriptions, which were collected via FoI requests, one for Kent Police stated the liaison officer was: To act as the single point of contact within the Gypsy Liaison Team ensuring effective liaison with Serious Crime Directorate (SCD) for the policing of organised criminal gangs  collating data, keeping packages up to date and building intelligence profiles on individuals until dissemination as required, in order to support the SCD in building central records on gang criminality. The findings, contained in a report titled Policing by consent: understanding and improving relations between Gypsies, Roma and Irish Travellers, are being presented on Friday by the Traveller Movement at a joint event with the National Police Chiefs Council. Drawing on interviews with 17 police officers and 13 members of the Gypsy, Roma and Traveller community, it asserts the police are failing to have due regard for their public sector equality duty. Three-quarters of the police officers surveyed identified unconscious bias and/or racist behaviour towards Gypsies, Roma and Travellers (GRT) within their forces.   Related: My community is vehemently against Travellers settling on a local common. How can I challenge this?    It quoted one constable as saying: Somebody made a comment very quietly  dead Gypsy, good Gypsy I complained to the sergeant and he [said]  they are not racist, they are just very frustrated. A GTLO was quoted as saying: Thats something you find a lot of, people using words and phrases which are highly offensive to Travellers  You get that from police officers as well, theyll use derogatory comments. Lord Ouseley, a council member of the Institute for Race Relations, said in the reports foreword: Based on the lived experiences presented in this report it is not difficult to see why there is a lack of trust. Police officers have reported derogatory and racist language used by colleagues against GRT people being insufficiently dealt with by internal police procedures  It is not right that some people have a more negative experience of public institutions such as the police simply because they belong to a particular ethnic group  this has to change. Yvonne MacNamara, the CEO of the Traveller Movement, said the report identified concerning police practice across Britains 45 police forces.  For example, it appears that increased numbers of police officers are deployed to incidents involving Gypsy, Roma and Irish Traveller people compared to other communities, she said. This suggests a bias based purely on ethnicity and a differential policing practice. As the primary agents of community cohesion the police have a responsibility to ensure an equitable police service for all. Jim Davies, the co-founder of the Gypsy, Roma and Traveller Police Association (GRTPA), said: Historically, the relationship between the police and Britains Gypsy and Traveller population has been one of enforcer versus criminal with little recognition of Gypsy Traveller ethnicity and little thought given to Gypsies and Travellers as service users. Whilst things are improving, this is still the case in many situations; its no surprise that mistrust runs deeply. For everyones benefit, this has to change. Chief superintendent Claire Nix of Kent police said: Kent police actively engage with Gypsy and Traveller communities through the work of the Gypsy Liaison Team. Their role is to develop an improved knowledge and understanding of the cultural differences and needs of different communities, to treat people with fairness, dignity and respect, and protect the public from harm."
"149""In an unscheduled press conference hours before the G7 summit was due to end, Donald Trump accused the rest of the world of treating the US like a piggy bank to be robbed, appeared to snub Theresa May and called for tariff-free trade with the G7 countries. In a bravado performance, he also described Russias annexation of Crimea as something that happened a while ago, warned in the bluntest of terms against economic retaliation for the USs introduction of tariffs, and described the way the EU treated the US as brutal.   Related: Donald Trump calls for G7 to readmit Russia ahead of summit    Referring to his longstanding complaint about trade and his decision to impose unilateral tariff barriers on metals, he denied the move was contentious, but admitted that he had used strong language to emphasise that the current position could not continue. Its not a question of I hope it will change, he said. Its going to change, 100%. Tariffs are going to come way down because people cannot continue to do that. Were like the piggy bank that everybodys robbing. And that ends. If they retaliate, theyre making a mistake because you see we have a tremendous trade imbalance ... Theres very bad spirit when we have a big trade imbalance and they keep raising it so we never catch up. Thats not a good thing to do. And we have very, very strong measures that take care of that ... the numbers are so astronomically against them ... we win that war a thousand times out of a thousand. In an omission that underlines the cooling relationship with the UK, he conspicuously failed to namecheck the British prime minister while referencing other G7 leaders as he ran through events of the past two days. Id say the level of relationship is a 10. We have a great relationship. Angela [Merkel], and Emmanuel [Macron] and Justin [Trudeau] ... I would say the relationship is a 10. Mays officials have been arguing that despite the pre-summit reports of Trump struggling with ther schoolmistressy style and her political correctness, he always listened to her carefully.  The US president, however, bluntly dismissed her complaint that it was wrong to talk of a trade imbalance as a question of national security. It is national security, its our balance sheet, its our strength, its absolutely national security, he said.  We have to have deals that are fair, and we have to have deals that are economic otherwise that does affect our military ... to have a great military you need a great balance sheet. With only hours to go before the summit wraps up, the prospect of a final communique agreed by all seven nations now hangs in the balance. Although there has been disagreement before, this has been the most openly tumultuous G7 meeting in the groupings 43-year history. It is feared that failure could ultimately threaten the future of the whole post-second world war system of international rules governing trade. A British official said on Saturday: Sherpas had a long night working on possible texts. There is a feeling a chairs statement is the most likely outcome, but talks are ongoing.  In what was widely seen as another ostentatious display of contempt for the process of international cooperation, Trump began the day by failing to show up for the start of the Saturday morning working session on gender equality.  The summit president, Justin Trudeau, had finished before he arrived. Canadas ambassador to France, Isabelle Hudon  the cochair of the session  was making her contribution when he finally walked in. The official pool photography session, when the worlds media are allowed in to take the days first pictures, was taking place and security personnel had to open a path for the president through a crowd of journalists.  As Hudon continued to talk about the need for gender equality to be included in every policy decision, Trump walked slowly to his seat while the whole room watched. His entrance is part of a pattern. He has demanded that Russia, suspended since the annexation of Crimea in 2014, be readmitted  a demand he reiterated in his press conference although it clearly undermines Mays initiative due to be signed off later on a rapid response unit to combat actions of hostile states. Before he had even left Washington, he was deep into a Twitter war with Trudeau over trade. In an indication of how concerned other G7 members are about the impact of Trumps decision, and the threat of escalation, on Friday, May and other leaders emphasised the USs leading role in setting up the international system. Closing communiques are usually written before the meeting begins. This time it was hanging in the balance as leaders flew in to the remote Quebec resort of La Malbaie on Thursday night. The meeting of leaders of the wests biggest economies is a regular occurrence. There have been three since Trump took office, although his dislike of international rules and collective action has made each of them knife-edge affairs. At last years G7, in Sicily, the trade row and Trumps determination to withdraw the US from the Paris climate change agreement  President Obamas biggest legacy  led to a tense summit and a final agreement that took note of US dissent."
"150""The Spanish newspaper El Pas has appointed its first female editor in its 42-year history at the end of a week that has also seen a record number of women chosen to serve in the new governments cabinet. Soledad Gallego-Daz, 67, joined the paper shortly after its founding in 1976 and has been its correspondent in Brussels, London, Paris, Buenos Aires and New York. She has also served as deputy editor and ombudsman. She was nominated by El Pass board and received the backing of more than 97% of the papers staff in a vote on Thursday. Addressing the papers journalists on Friday morning, Gallego-Daz reminded them that they existed to serve their readers. They know what they can call on us for and what they cant, and what they fundamentally want from us is that we dont stray from the truth, she said. Her nomination still needs to be formally approved by the board of directors of El Pas, the biggest Spanish-language publication in the world and an institution both in Spain and Latin America. Gallego-Daz replaces Antonio Cao, who occupied the post since 2014.  Under his editorship, the paper was scathing in its editorial opinion of the Socialist party leader, Pedro Snchez, who became Spains prime minister last week after deposing his conservative predecessor in a no-confidence vote. Gallego-Dazs appointment comes a month after El Pas announced that it had created the role of gender correspondent in recognition of the fact that society was undergoing a profound change after the #MeToo movement and recent large-scale women rights protests across the country. The change is also evident in politics. Snchez appointed 11 women and six men to his cabinet on Wednesday, saying his government was unmistakably committed to equality. He said his would be the first majority-female cabinet since Spain returned to democracy following the death of Gen Francisco Franco in 1975. This is a highly qualified government for a society with equal representation, open to the world but anchored in Europe, he said."
"151""In both of Mexicos last two presidential elections, Julieta Brambila voted for Andrs Manuel Lpez Obrador because she supported his plans to tackle corruption, curb poverty and overturn neoliberal economic policies. Polls ahead of this Sundays vote suggest that the silver-haired left-winger is finally on the brink of victory, but Brambila admits to some mixed feelings over his surprisingly conservative positions on social issues.    Related: 'Amlo': the veteran leftwinger who could be Mexico's next president    I agree with a good part of his policies on the economy, combatting corruption and security, said Brambila, who is a trans women and professor of communications. But on issues like diversity, I dont think he  or any candidate  has any proposals. Lpez Obrador, known as Amlo, has built a commanding lead, capitalizing on growing frustration over political corruption and rising violence.  But social issues such as abortion and marriage equality have been secondary in the race, with all four male candidates seeking to appeal to an electorate craving change  but often showing an aversion to risk. On the campaign trail, Amlo, 64, often speaks of faith and values. He has promised to draft a moral constitution but mostly dodged clear answers on social issues such as same-sex marriage and abortion.   s car at a campaign event in Guerrero, Mexico on Monday.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Amlos car at a campaign event in Guerrero, Mexico, on Monday. Photograph: David Guzmn/EPA    He has also forged an electoral alliance with a socially conservative party founded by evangelical Christians, which could end up claiming 10% of the seats in Congress. I dont think rights will be rolled back [with an Amlo administration and conservatives in his congressional coalition] Brambila said. But progress is going to be more difficult. This years election comes after a well-funded pro-family lobby made an aggressive push into Mexico politics with a high-profile campaign against marriage equality.  Politicians of all stripes have sought support from Catholic priests, evangelical pastors and social conservatives But Amlos positions on marriage equality and abortion have stirred disquiet among the LGBT community and women groups.    Related: Mexico's gay couples fight backlash against same-sex marriage    As mayor of Mexico City from 2000-2005, Amlo held off on promoting same-sex marriage and the decriminalisation of abortion  both of which were eventually introduced in the city by his successor, Marcelo Ebrard.  In a 2015 interview with W Radio he suggested that fighting poverty and graft were more important priorities for progressives: The most important thing is honesty. [Decriminalizing abortion and marriage equality]  with total respect and authenticity, I consider it something not that important. Whats important in Mexico is that we end corruption.  Some political observers say Amlo has appealed to traditional and religious values in an attempt to soften a radical image after accusations from opponents that he planned to turn Mexico into another Venezuela. Its served to lower the resistance, said Diego Petersen Farah, columnist with the Guadalajara newspaper El Informador. Amlos party, the movement for national renewal, is better known by its acronym Morena  another name for the Mexicos patron saint, Our Lady of Guadalupe. He announced his candidacy on her feast day, 12 December.  His exact religious affiliation  Catholic or Protestant  is the subject of speculation. But one journalist in his home state of Tabasco  where votive candles bearing his image sell briskly  says its a moot point.     Candles with pictures of Amlo sold in a market in the Mexican city of Villahermosa, his hometown, on 22 June 2018. Photograph: Rodrigo Arangua/AFP/Getty Images    Its not so much church with Andrs Manuel, rather ethics and ethical behaviour, said Juan Urcola, who has interviewed Amlo often.  Amlos electoral coalition includes the Social Encounter Party (PES), which was founded by evangelical Christians and in 2016 voted against a presidential proposal to enshrine same-sex marriage in the constitution. The PES president, Hugo Eric Flores, has previously said that marriage equality was a fad. In an interview, he promised tolerance, but also said: We are in favour of the traditional family, and thats not a bad thing to say so.  Same-sex marriage is allowed in some Mexican states, though any couple can marry in any state so long as they first obtain a court injunction.  Abortion on demand is only legal in the countrys capital, but when Amlos campaign released a document on women issues, it omitted any mention of the subject. In an interview, his pick for interior minister, former supreme court justice Olga Snchez Cordero, promised that an Amlo administration would make abortion legal nationally by including it in an expanded federal criminal code. But Amlos refusal to be drawn on social issues has raised disquiet among potential supporters on the left. There are these mixed signals, said Estefana Vela Barba, a professor at Cide, a research university. Theyre making us wait until he is in the presidency to see what he actually thinks."
"152""To travel on the Paris mtro is to take a journey through French  and world  history. Honoured with a station name are war heroes, statesmen, artists and writers including Charles de Gaulle, Markos Botsaris, Franklin D Roosevelt and Victor Hugo. But notable by their absence are women. Only four of the 303 stops on 16 lines are named after female figures, French or otherwise. Now, with two new stations being created on a central line extension, French feminists say it is time to end the snub. The campaign group Osez le fminisme (Dare to be a feminist) is urging people to vote for a women in an online consultation that offers six possible names  three male and three female  that closes on 17 June. Did you know that in Paris only four mtro stations out of 303 make reference to a women  You want to change that? So vote! the organisation writes on its Facebook page. Raphalle Rmy-Leleu, a spokeswomen, told the Observer: We have to rename a few more existing stations after women. Most stations make reference to the exploits of what we call in France the Grands Hommes, but we have some great women who also deserve to be recognised. Unfortunately, this is not reflected in the mtro which is an example of how France continues to ignore the role of women in its history. Among the proposed new station names are the French singer-songwriter Barbara  born Monique Andre Serf  who died in 1997; Lucie Aubrac, a member of the French Resistance who died in 2007; and the American singer Nina Simone, who died in 2003.     Osez le Feminisme is campaigning for the new stations to be named after women. Photograph: Alamy    Last month, the Europe stop on line&#xa0;3 was renamed Europe-Simone Veil in honour of the health minister and Auschwitz survivor, who died last year. The three other stations named after women are Barbs-Rochechouart, a tribute to Marguerite de Rochechouart de Montpipeau, who was abbess of Montmartre; Pierre et Marie Curie, after the Nobel prize-winning physicists, and Louise Michel, a Paris Commune militant. There is a Rosa Parks station on the RER suburban rail network in north Paris, named after the American civil rights activist. Rmy-Leleu said: Historically, we have effaced women from transport. In fact, the situation is even worse than reported, because of those four stations, only one is not part of a composite name and that is Louise&#xa0;Michel, a station thats not actually in Paris intra mures [within the city walls]. Last November, President Emmanuel Macron said his country was sick with sexism and declared gender equality and combating violence against women to be a great cause of his presidency. In March, following a backlash led by the actor Catherine Deneuve against the #MeToo movement that enraged feminists, the government said it would promote gender equality in education, the workplace and daily life, including fines for sexual harassment in public places. Progress, however, is slow. Last year, for the first time since the modern exam was introduced more than 20 years ago, a book by a women was among the required works for the literary baccalaurat. La Princesse de Montpensier is a 17th-century court romance by Madame de La Fayette. Franoise Cahen, who teaches at a lyce in a south-eastern suburb of Paris, set up a successful petition calling for the education authorities to address the sexism. Last week, while adjudicating at an oral baccalaurat exam she was shocked to discover that not one of the texts given to 300 pupils to study had been written by a women.     Only four of the 303 stops on the network are named after women. Photograph: C. Sappa/Getty Images    It was so depressing. Things are slowly but surely getting better, but theres still some way to go, Cahen said. The publishers of school books are making a lot of effort to improve the proportion of women writers and so things are moving forward but gradually. Osez le fminismes Mtro campaign has been criticised by those suggesting there are more important issues. Rmy-Leleu admits the station campaign is symbolic, but points out that the group is also pushing for lesbian couples and single women to be given the same access to fertility treatment as heterosexual couples. It is also running a protest against a concert tour by Bertrand Cantat, a rock star who was convicted of killing his partner Marie Trintignant in 2003. France has a history of naming roads or railway stations after celebrated figures, even foreigners. Last November, the Burgundy town of Avallon named a street after Jo Cox, the MP for Batley and Spen who was killed during the Brexit campaign in June 2016. But this is the first time mtro station names will be chosen by the public. They are due to open in June 2021."
"153""A senior Japanese politician has described couples who decide not to have children as selfish, and cited the postwar baby boom as evidence that hardship neednt be an obstacle to having bigger families. Toshihiro Nikai, the secretary general of the ruling Liberal Democratic party [LDP], is the latest conservative politician to urge people to have more children, as demographers warn that Japans population will decline dramatically in the coming decades. During and after the war when people were living on the edge of starvation, nobody said its better not to have children because its too much trouble, Kyodo news quoted Nikai as saying at a meeting in Tokyo on Tuesday.   Related: Single women a 'burden on the state', says Japanese MP    These days, some people have a selfish idea that it is better not to have children. The prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has vowed to raise the birthrate and the number of women in the workplace, but his government is struggling to deliver on promises to meet demand for childcare places. In a recent survey, 70% of parents said they would like more children but were deterred from having bigger families by financial worries and difficulties balancing work with home life. Almost 348,000 children have been denied places at childcare facilities, according to a recent report by the Nomura Research Institute, suggesting Abe will struggle to achieve his goal of raising the number of working women aged 25-44 to 80% over the next five years. Nikai is one of several LDP politicians to have drawn criticism for telling couples to have bigger families. In May, Kanji Kato, a lower house MP, said women should have multiple children and warned those who preferred to remain single that they would become a burden on the state later in life.   Related: Discounts and time off work: how Japan is battling a birthrate in decline    Later that month, Koichi Hagiuda, the partys executive acting secretary general and an Abe confidante, said childrearing was a womens job, and suggested that being raised by their fathers could impair childrens development. We talk about cool ideas such as gender equality and mens involvement in childrearing, but they are unwelcome ideas for children, Kyodo quoted Hagiuda as saying. About 941,000 children were born in Japan last year, the lowest number since records began in 1899. The countrys birthrate remains low despite the introduction of financial and other incentives to encourage couples to have bigger families. Among 32 countries with a population of 40 million or more, Japan ranks lowest in terms of the percentage of children in the overall population, at 12.3%, according to the UN demographic yearbook."
"154""It isnt hard to see why Chisaki Okumura is one of Japans best female sumo wrestlers. Combining her considerable height and heft with flashes of speed, her practice bouts end with a succession of opponents thrown to the ground or shoved unceremoniously out of the ring. On a humid, wet afternoon in central Japan, Okumura draws on her reserves of strength for a final, punishing series of drills with a male opponent. By the end, it is hard to tell who is more exhausted.   Related: Women ordered off stage at sumo contest after trying to help stricken mayor    For more than two hours every weekday afternoon, the 17 men and nine women of Asahi Universitys sumo club stretch, warm up and perform drills together, although for safety reasons they conduct full-on bouts separately. Training is centered on two dohyo  a dirt-covered 4.55m diameter circle marked out with half-buried rice-straw bales - which are among the few places where female sumo wrestlers are defying the centuries-old sports uneasy relationship with gender.     A female and a male member of the Asahi University sumo team practice against each other during their daily training. Photograph: Laura Liverani for the Guardian    As amateurs, the women athletes at Asahi and other universities are not bound by the ancient traditions governing professional sumo - in which only men can compete. But that might not be the case for much longer. Many hope the ban on women joining the professional sumo ranks will one day be overturned, proving that deep-seated misogyny has no place in a sport striving to be accepted as an Olympic event. In April, not long after professional sumo was rocked again by allegations of bullying and violence, an incident at an exhibition tournament in Maizuru, near Kyoto, triggered a new campaign to rid Japans de facto national sport of its sexist traditions. The row was triggered by after several women, including at least one nurse, rushed on to the ring to administer first aid to the local mayor, who had collapsed after suffering a stroke. Using the public address system, the referee repeatedly ordered them to leave the ring, but the women refused.  Officials sprinkled purifying salt on the wrestling surface after they had left. Sumo officials later denied that this had been done because of the women presence in the ring. Salt is customarily scattered on the ring before bouts and after a wrestler has been injured. The impromptu first responders had fallen foul of an ancient rule banning women from entering, or even touching, the dohyo.  The rule has prevented local female politicians from presenting awards inside the ring. The Maizuru incident not only embarrassed sumo but was also seen as a metaphor for the treatment of women in Japan, which performs poorly in global tables of gender equality and female political representation. Sumo is for everyone Tomoko Nakagawa, the mayor of Takarazuka in western Japan, has unsuccessfully petitioned the Japan sumo association to lift the ban. I cant understand why it is only the sumo world that refuses to change or is even going backwards, she told Agence France-Presse. The sports struggle with sexism is equally baffling to Okumura, who has been wrestling since she was at middle school. Sumo shouldnt be thought of as a sport for men and women, its for everyone, says Okumura, runner-up in last months international women sumo invitational championships in the 64-80kg category. I definitely benefit from being able to train with the men, and I dont get the impression that theyre looking down on me and the other women. If I were allowed to compete against them in a proper bout I think I could hold my own. The Asahi club was formed eight years ago and is now one of about half a dozen women sumo clubs at Japanese universities. The female members use the same number of kimarite  or winning moves  as the men, but wear their mawashi belts over shorts and T-shirts.   Related: Big trouble: all of Japan's sumo wrestlers to be questioned as sport lurches into crisis    There are some people who still struggle to accept the idea of women sumo, but Ive never thought it was at all unusual, says Shigeto Takahashi, the clubs manager, who has been coaching female wrestlers for 35 years. The only real difference is that the women have to be a little more careful about injuring their shoulders, but theyre not allowed to wear any padding. Kaori Matsui, an associate professor in the universitys department of health and sports sciences, and the clubs deputy manager, said it was natural for women to compete in sumo, having already broken down barriers in other contact sports such as wrestling and judo.     Two members of the Asahi University women sumo team go through their routine training, practicing Shiko, or foot stomping. Photograph: Laura Liverani for the Guardian    The number of new women taking up amateur sumo is static, however, a problem she blames on the dearth of female coaches to offer guidance to girls and young women. Some people I meet are amazed that there is even an international women sumo scene, she says. There needs to be a more coordinated approach to promoting the brilliance of women sumo. When you watch it close up, its exhilarating. While weary wrestlers gulp down cups of cold tea from a copper kettle, Minayo Nishimoto shows few signs of fatigue - unsurprising, perhaps, for a women who has been hurling her comparatively slight frame around sumo rings since she was nine years old. I understand that the dohyo is regarded as sacred, but whichever way you look at it, the ban on women is sexist, says Nishimoto, who prides herself on her uwatenage overarm throw. But that just makes me all the more determined to carry on and be the best female wrestler in Japan."
"155""A year ago, Saranzaya Chambuu received a distressed phone call from her sister Naranzaya. Their roommate had brought a male friend home the night before. When she left for work, he stayed. Hours later, Naranzaya called her elder sister. She was crying and asking: Who was that man? He raped me and then he left. 
That man, they would soon learn, was a ruling party MP, Gantulga Dorjdugar, who is now under investigation. He says he has been wrongly accused and the two mutually consented to having sex. 
 
  
  
  Saranzaya Chambuu, whose sister alleges she was raped by an MP. 
  Photograph: Byamba Ochir/MPA for the Guardian 
  
 
It is one of the most high-profile political scandals in Mongolia in years, and highlights both the progress and the challenges in a nascent but growing women rights movement. Saranzaya, 32, is one of a small but increasingly bold group of women calling on their country to tackle pervasive sexual violence. 
For some, this is the beginning of Mongolias #MeToo movement, though weak laws and a culture of victim-blaming mean it has a long way to go. 
Some people ask why dont we stop and why are we fighting for this, Saranzaya said. We want to make a path for other women. If this can win in court and they can bring justice to victims, we can prove the system is just and that will help other victims. 
According to Mongolias first nation-wide survey on gender-based violence, released on Thursday by the national statistics office and the UN Population Fund (UNFPA), 31% of women say they have been subjected to sexual or physical violence by their partner.  
One in seven women (14%) say they have been subjected to sexual violence by someone who was not their partner  a figure twice as high as the estimated world average and higher than almost anywhere else in Asia, according to Henriette Jansen, a UNFPA adviser. 
In Mongolia there is huge variation in proportions of women experiencing non-partner sexual violence throughout the country. It is everywhere and sexual abuse against women is quite alarming compared with the rest of the region, said Jansen. 
 
  
  
   
     
    
    News doesn't always have to be bad  indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do.
    This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come.
    Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com
    
   
  
  
 
 
 &nbsp; 
 
  Sign up here for weekly email updates from this series
  
 
But a backlash is building. In March a group of women knitted hundreds of red pussyhats and wore them to a protest against violence in the capital on International women Day. In May a women group held a performance of the Vagina Monologues, translated into Mongolian.  
In 2016, after years of lobbying by activists and female lawmakers, the country made domestic violence a crime for the first time. Now a consortium of NGOs is pushing for sexual harassment in the workplace to be included in the countrys labour laws. Sexual assault or abuse below the level of rape is handled by the countrys human rights commission, which can only make recommendations. 
Justice delayed 
While awareness is increasing, justice is still rare. Naranzayas case stalled at first when two doctors who first examined her took a leave of absence and then were replaced. The case was reopened in August after Naranzayas family provided items  underwear and a duvet  found to have traces of Gantulgas semen. Gantulga, whose lawyer did not respond to requests for comment, has repeated his clients assertion of innocence.  
The national survey found that only 10% of women who said they had experienced severe sexual violence, including rape, from someone who was not their partner, said they reported their case to the police. A separate survey of 300 rape victims by the Gender Equality Centre found that about 65% of reported assaults went to trial. Just 9.5% of victims polled said they had received compensation. Police data shows victims get on average 804,854 tugrik  about 250. 
Women who speak out are often blamed. Late last year Bolor Zaankhuu, 33, published her own #MeToo account. Fifteen years ago, while taking an elevator up to her fourth-floor apartment, a man grabbed her from behind and groped her, she wrote in a blog. She struggled until the elevator doors opened and she ran out and down the stairs to the ground floor. When she went to the police with her father, she recalled, she was reprimanded for wearing a tank top. It was the middle of summer. 
 
  
  
  Bolor Zaankhuu. 
  Photograph: Byamba Ochir/MPA for the Guardian 
  
 
Immediately I was blamed, she said. Bolor later identified her attacker, who spent one night at the police station before being let go. Now, she said, she waits to take elevators until no men are around and she doesnt allow her 10-year-old daughter to go anywhere alone.  
A women who lives and works in Ulaanbaatar said that on one occasion four years ago she woke up in a hotel to find a man raping her. Later when she filed a police report alleging she had been drugged and assaulted, the investigator said she was not likely to get compensation and encouraged her to drop the case. Eventually she did. 
I dont feel bad about it any more. At least, I want to shake that mindset. Women feel guilty. Because they got drunk or because they went to that party, they blame themselves  that if I hadnt been wearing this or that, then this wouldnt have happened, she told the Guardian, asking that her name not be published. 
Women have contacted Saranzaya to say they too have been victims of sexual assault, but no one has joined her campaign. The sisters have been called prostitutes and liars. Others say Saranzaya is using her sister to try to extort money from the MP. Even women rights groups have stayed away after critics accused Saranzaya of being politically motivated. 
Hospital shelter 
Researchers and advocates are worried not just about the extent of sexual violence in Mongolia but the severity of it. The survey found 72% of women who said they had been injured by their partners reported severe harm such as broken bones, cuts to the head and in some cases miscarriages. Researchers found forms of abuse particular to Mongolia: hundreds of women reported being chased by their partners in cars, on motorcycles or horses, or being lashed with whips. 
The number of people reporting abuse is growing, a statistic that could mean more people are willing to do so, or abuse is on the rise, or some combination of the two.  
At the One Stop Service Centre, a small office and room with bunkbeds at Ulaanbaatars main trauma hospital, abused women can shelter with their children for up to 72 hours and seek medical help, therapy and legal advice. 
Deedentsetseg Chuluunbayar, a social worker at the centre, said that in 2008, the first year it was open, it received around 300 women. Last year the number was 960, despite the centre closing for a month, and now it gets at least eight women a day. On payday and public holidays, more women come to the hospital with injuries. On 18 March, Soldiers Day in Mongolia, 15 women came to the centre. 
 
  
  
  The One Stop centre in Ulaanbataar. 
  Photograph: Byamba Ochir/MPA for the Guardian 
  
 
Deedentsetseg said Mongolias new domestic violence law could lead to fewer women reporting abusive partners. In the past, women reported their husbands to the police to scare them, and then they would drop the case. Under the new law, domestic violence cases have to go forward to trial.  
Its really a difficult situation because most of the women who come here dont want to disrupt the family and are dependent on their husbands, Deedentsetseg said. 
Reverse gender gap 
It is unclear why sexual violence is apparently so prevalent in Mongolia, a middle-income country that prides itself on its peaceful transition from a former Soviet satellite to a democracy in 1990.  
Some blame a macho culture, while others point to a reverse gender gap. For years after the transition, families invested more of their resources in sending their daughters to school and kept their sons home to herd.  
Mongolian women now outpace men in education, health and work. Men have higher rates of unemployment and alcoholism, and their average lifespan is 10 years shorter than that of women. 
Mens reputation has fallen. These things can be a reason why more men are angry with women, which leads to violence, said Boldbaatar Tumur, head of the Mens Association in Gobisumber province, which works on raising awareness of mens issues. 
Others say Mongolias close-knit rural communities encourage a culture of silence. Very few people can say me too, said Oyungerel Tsedevdamba, a former MP who pushed for the law criminalising domestic violence. In the countryside there is no anonymity, and because of that no one wants to speak out. 
Gerelee Odonchimed, vice-director for education and advocacy at Women for Change, a women empowerment group, said Mongolias women rights movement needed more patience. It can be slow but, yes, time is up, she said. We arent talking about changing the colours of the walls. We are talking about changing peoples minds. 
Saranzaya and Naranzaya are also taking things slowly. They have moved into a new apartment and Naranzaya, 26, is back at school, studying to become a teacher. Shes starting to feel OK again, Saranzaya said of her sister. 
This week Gantulga, the accused MP, resigned from parliament. Saranzaya has noticed that when the case is in the news again, her sister slips back into a depression. She has wondered whether they ought to drop the case and move on with their lives. I said if its too difficult we can stop, but she says no, we will fight together. 
Additional reporting by Munkhchimeg Davaasharav 
 This article is part of a series on possible solutions to some of the worlds most stubborn problems. What else should we cover? Email us at theupside@theguardian.com"
"156""A detachment of black dykes on trikes were to the fore as the New York pride march began on Sunday, a year short of the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall Riots, the event now agreed to have created the modern gay rights movement.   Related: New York City's 49th LGBT pride march  in pictures    The 2018 march was led by the tennis legend Billie Jean King and the transgender advocate Tyler Ford. The actor Cynthia Nixon, a contender to be governor of New York state, was present, as was her rival Andrew Cuomo, as thousands of marchers in rainbow colors celebrated LGBT identity in Greenwich Village and up the canyon of Fifth Avenue.  Many marchers said that the gay movement had begun to find a new purpose, after a succession of legislative victories removed many of the most overt aspects of sexual or gender discrimination in American society. I would argue that our coming out has never been more important than it is right now, Nixon said in a video message. Whether we are lesbian or gay or transgender or Muslim or Mexican or any one of a number other categories I could name, we are allies united by our otherness.  The candidate neatly captured the newfound purpose for a march that some say has come close in recent years to becoming just another commercialised event, akin to Halloween or Valentines Day. The vice-president, Mike Pence, has supported gay conversion therapy. Donald Trump has pushed for a ban on transgender people in the military. The presence of such men in the White House has given the movement new energy, said Danielle Diaz, visiting with girlfriends from Peekskill and standing outside the Stonewall Inn.      The Peekskill delegation. Photograph: Ed Helmore/the Guardian    Pence does not support gay rights at all, Diaz said. From the beginning, gay pride has been a protest  against police brutality, against violence, against [violence against] LGBT people, against black people, its always stood for whats right. So this year its against Trump, and against border policy for sure  and all the craziness thats happening. Diaz added: We want everybody to feel accepted and welcome no matter what they are or where theyre from or what they identify as.  Other attendees said victories such as the legalisation of same-sex marriage in 2015 did not necessarily mean parity had been secured. This month, the supreme court ruled in favor of a baker who refused to make a wedding cake for a gay couple, on religious grounds.  Even though we have gay marriage, we still have people who dont want to bake wedding cakes for us, said David Jones, from the Bronx. So if we bat our eye, it could all go backwards and thats not where we want to go. Joness niece, Tiffany Baskerville, said she did not identify as LGBT. But the key was to speak out, she said, as an activist. Its not like, Hey, we want a gay president. Its like we want somebody who can understand and speak for everybody. Were not just gay first, but human first. Pamela Meyer, from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, said she had not had the good luck to be gay. She was visiting to support her gay sisters and brothers. I think straights are incredibly stupid about a lot of stuff, she said. Race, gender, everything. They got it all and they want to keep it.      Julian Cavalier. Photograph: Ed Helmore/the Guardian    Others, however, claimed a paradox: that by reducing the concept of gay pride to a march, an anthem and a rainbow flag for people from all sections of society to support, a sense of community had become undone.  I miss the days of the bars, with hundreds of our people in one location, said Jim Cook, from Pennsylvania. Now a gay bar is like any straight bar. Mainstream. With all the equality and all the rights it just seems like we lost a little of our identity. Sometimes it feels like weve become straight. Among slightly younger gay men, like Julian Cavalier, the messages were more specific. I love drag, he said, I love everything that drag stands for. Its outlet. Its our way to feel accepted. Drag means acceptance. Street vendors with rainbow flags and large buttons carrying slogans said pride was good for business, bringing in at least $1,000 in the day.  As Sylvesters I Need You blared from a nearby boombox, Anna Thomas, 25, a bisexual women from New Jersey, said gay pride in 2018 meant the culmination of everything the movement had accomplished.  Theres still work to be done, she said, but I like it that gay, straight, bi, trans, confused, everybody comes together here. Its a beautiful spirit. You can get laid, but Im more here for the party.     A biker. Photograph: Ed Helmore/the Guardian    As the lesbian bikers on their trikes and hogs made their way down Christopher Street, some in attendance wondered whether the location would mean as much in 10 years time as it did 10 or 20 years ago.  Italians no longer live in Little Italy, said Sean Edwards. Will gays still live in the West Village? You dont have to live in the West Village to be safe now. So will gay pride just become symbolic like St Patricks Day?  It was beautiful, he said, to see the utopian vision of humanity expressed by the march, on one day a year at least: Everybody gets to be their truest self. The age range of attendees was wide. Tasha Georgiades, 11, said she had come along so she could wear the rainbow colors."
"157""Mike Pence is going to a drag show on Friday. Its not listed on his official itinerary for the trip, but when he arrives in Columbus, Ohio, hell be greeted by drag queens, soundsystems and hundreds of LGBT revellers. The delightfully festive crossover comes as the US vice-president is set to speak at an event being held by at the controversial pro-Trump non-profit America First Policies, just as Pride weekend in Columbus kicks off. To commemorate the visit, the LGBT community has decided to throw him a party outside the downtown hotel where hes speaking. In tow will be a dozen drag performers, two DJs, and speeches from politicians like Rick Neal, the gay Democratic candidate for Ohios 15th US congressional district.   Related: Indiana Republicans reaffirm Pence-era opposition to same-sex marriage    The Welcome Mike Pence: Big LGBTQ Dance Party was launched on a whim on Facebook on Monday of this week, Jay Smith, one of the organizers of the event explained, and in a few days it has snowballed beyond anything he imagined. Nearly 2,000 have expressed interest on the Facebook page. Apparently a lot of people want to see Mike Pence dance to Robyn. Smith says hes anticipating five to six hundred people, although that number could grow. We want to jam the street with as many people as we can celebrating. I would love to see a sea of rainbow and dancing, he said. The energy that has developed stems from his record on LGBT issues. Its been amplified because hes coming on Friday, the first day of Columbus Pride. The fact that hes anti-LGBT and hes coming on Pride weekend? We couldnt do nothing. Pences record on LGBT issues has indeed been terrible. Some of his greatest bigoted hits came as governor of Indiana, when he signed a so-called religious freedom bill into law that would have effectively served as a license to discriminate against gay people. It was later toned down after an uproar. In Congress, he supported an amendment that would define marriage as only between a man and a women, and voted against the Dont Ask Dont Tell repeal. During his run for Congress he appears to have advocated for the horrific practice known as conversion therapy  something he later denied. America First Policies record on the issues isnt all that great either. Recently Carl Higbie, a top staffer at the group, resigned after numerous racist and homophobic comments he had made in the past were reported. That kind of record would justify a more serious demonstration but partying as protest has a longstanding tradition in the gay community, with pride events traditionally coupling political activism with a celebration of queer culture.    I always tell my friends in other cities: you cant believe how gay Columbus, Ohio, is until youve been there to experience it!  Sable Coate, drag queen     Its a tactic used by other groups, too. After being caught on video delivering a racist rant in a New York cafe last month, lawyer Aaron Schlossberg was met with revelers outside his apartment partying in the streets and singing along to a mariachi band. A number of high-profile electronic artists and DJs are planning a marathon dance party in the UK to protest against Donald Trumps first visit.  In that spirit, parties like this are an ironic torment. Dont like Mexicans? Good luck sleeping through this mariachi band, pal. Dont like gay people? Watch us werk.  We decided to go with the dance party because its fun, its a loving event. When people dance theyre happy, Smith said. We want to demonstrate for the LGBT community, especially those struggling with their gender identity or sexual orientation, that while this administration doesnt have their back, we have their back and that were going to be fighting for them every day. The LGBTQ scene here is very strong, and very much supported by the city, from the mayor down, Sable Coate, one of the drag queens co-hosting the event added. Its funny because, I always tell my friends in other cities: you cant believe how gay Columbus, Ohio, is until youve been there to experience it!  Thats something Coate hopes Pence finds out for himself. I dont think its a coincidence that he chose to come to Columbus during Pride Weekend. We have to show them were here in peace, were here in happiness, were here to celebrate, but we dont agree with your choices regarding our community and all we want as Americans is equality. In other words, if you cant get Mike Pence to go to the drag show, you have to bring the drag show to him."
"158""Oxfam has warned staff it needs to urgently find 16m of savings and radically reduce the number of its poverty-relieving programmes as the charity copes with the ongoing fallout from the Haiti sex scandal, the Guardian can reveal. 
An internal document circulated last week by the chief executive of Oxfam GB, Mark Goldring, says the charity will have to save substantial amounts of money to put [us] on a more stable and sustainable footing. 
The seven-page document, which is marked confidential, states: It is clear ... that the size of our programmes will be substantially reduced for this year and next ... this means making tough choices.  
It says job losses are inevitable. Selling off high-street shops and reducing the number of countries in which Oxfam operates are both proposals under consideration. 
Oxfam GB has been struggling to win back the confidence of the public, the UK government and its donors following allegations that members of its staff used sex workers during a relief mission after an earthquake hit Haiti in 2010. 
The charity stands accused of having failed to disclose details of the alleged sexual misconduct by its staff to the Charity Commission, which has launched an inquiry. 
The internal document, which has been seen by the Guardian, sets out the charitys early thinking about how to tackle the reduction in funding in the UK, but explains decisions will have to be taken quickly to avoid further erosion of financial and organisational health. 
 
  
  
  Oxfam CEO Mark Goldring (left) outside the Department for International Development in February after the scandal broke. 
  Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
  
 
In a statement, Oxfam confirmed the 16m figure and said the appalling behaviour of some former staff in Haiti ... means we now have less money to provide clean water, food and other support to people who need it. 
This week, Haiti banned Oxfam from operating in the country, citing the charitys violation of its laws and serious breach of the principle of human dignity. The revelations also led to a temporary ban on funding from the Department of International Development (DfID). 
Oxfam GB is at the heart of the charitys work, employing about 2,000 staff in the UK to support its international campaigns against poverty. 
In its last annual report, the charity said it had raised more than 400m from donors and helped 11.6 million people across the world. Almost half of the money it raised was from governments and institutions for specific projects, with the funding being restricted to those causes. 
The charity needs to make substantial savings because of a 16m shortfall in its unrestricted budget  money raised from its shops and individuals to be spent on whatever it sees fit. 
The document says 16m represents around 10% of our relevant income. With the charity still reeling from the Haiti scandal, the document says one of the charitys guiding principles over the next two years is to protect and reinforce women rights, gender justice and culture change. 
 
  
  
   
    What happened in Haiti?
    
    Oxfam GB has been accused of covering up an inquiry into whether its staff used sex workers in Haiti in 2011 during a relief effort following the previous years earthquake. It is alleged those who were paid by the aid workers may have been underage. An investigation by the Times found that Oxfam had allowed three men to resign and sacked four others for gross misconduct after an inquiry into sexual exploitation, the downloading of pornography, bullying and intimidation.
    
    How much money could Oxfam lose?
    
    The UK government has threatened to cut funds to Oxfam unless it shows moral leadership. In 2016-17, Oxfams income was 408.6m, according to its annual report, including 31.7m from the DfID. Aidan Warner of the National Council for Voluntary Organisations said: They will be concerned not just about the money but the endorsement that the relationship with DfID represents, and they are clearly working hard to regain the confidence of the government as well as the public.&nbsp;
    
    How much does the DfID give to NGOs?
    
    Last year the UK government dedicated 13.3bn to international aid. About 1.2bn of UK aid is spent annually through NGOs. In 2016, the UK was one of only six countries to spend 0.7% of gross national income on aid, a target set by the UN for all developed countries. Penny Mordaunt, the international development secretary, has said the UK remains committed to this target, despite some Tory MPs calling for it to be dropped.
    
    Should other NGOs be worried?
    
    A number have now been implicated. Some of the employees involved in the Haiti case went on to work for other NGOs. Over the weekend, the Sunday Times also reported that more than 120 workers from Britains leading charities have been accused of sexual abuse in the past year. Save the Children, which in 2016 secured multi-year contracts worth 91m with the government, had 31 cases, 10 of which were referred to the police. The British Red Cross, which admitted a small number of cases of harassment reported in the UK, received 16.3m in DfID funding.
    
   
  
  
 
But with less money coming in, and with programmes greatly reduced, it says, we need to be running a smaller infrastructure ... sadly the loss of some roles is inevitable as we cannot otherwise make savings of this scale. 
It adds: We will seek to maintain our overall level of support for country programmes but narrow the range of support we offer within our themes of water, women, work and equality. In addition, from 2019 we will begin to reduce the number of countries in which we invest as a partner affiliate. 
The charity has also pledged to sell freehold property to quickly raise substantial funds. This will be done mainly on a sale and lease back basis to preserve our ability to trade from these locations. 
The document acknowledges that Oxfam has to win back confidence. We know we need to better inspire and engage the UK public, it says. 
Oxfam had to stop bidding for some institutional donorsafter the Haiti scandal. Some big donors, such as the EU and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) have said they will begin accepting bids from Oxfam again, but the DfID ban has yet to be lifted. 
An Oxfam spokesperson said: We are devastated that the appalling behaviour of some former staff in Haiti, and shortcomings in how we dealt with that eight years ago, means we now have less money to provide clean water, food and other support to people who need it. 
We are immensely grateful to all those  including more than nine in 10 of our regular givers  who have continued to support us during these difficult times. This support makes a massive difference to people struggling to escape poverty and to survive disasters around the world. 
We are cutting head office and support functions to ensure that we can continue with the majority of our lifesaving and life-changing work on the ground, such as helping Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh and people struggling to survive war in Yemen. 
Our other top priority for investment is our action plan to strengthen our continuing efforts to root out sexual harassment and abuse. 
Goldring has agreed to step down from his role later this year. In a statement, he said: Along with all of you, I feel anger at the impact of the abhorrent abuse of power by those individuals in Haiti in 2011 and Oxfams failure to protect the women we were there to support. Oxfam is overwhelmingly a force for good."
"159""Theresa May landed in Quebec on Thursday, swapping bruising rows with cabinet colleagues over Brexit for what could also be bruising confrontations between the US president Donald Trump and the other G7 members over tariffs and foreign policy.  
The 44th meeting of the G7 group of the worlds seven richest countries is taking place deep in rural Quebec in eastern Canada. The venue is a vast ski-and-golf resort that sits by a lake in the basin of a 34-mile crater left by a meteor strike millions of years ago. It writes its own metaphors. 
But the remote beauty of the landscape will not be matched by the atmosphere inside. The worthy agenda of gender equality and economic prosperity proposed by the host, the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, is already deep in the shadow of an unprecedented series of rows among the G7 members.  
 
  Related: The G7 minus one: Trump packs wrecking ball for Canada summit  
 
The combined pressure of six  France, Germany, the UK, Japan, Canada and Italy (the latter largely absent resolving domestic issues)  to persuade Trump either to stick with the Iran nuclear deal or to reconsider his determination to impose tariff barriers on steel and aluminium imports has so far failed.  
Tariffs are the more urgent issue. The EU has already handed the WTO a list of goods from jeans to motorbikes that would be covered by any tit for tat trade restrictions. In less than 30 days, damaging tariffs could be in place. 
 
  
  
   
    
    Donald Trumps victory in US election in November 2016 put the fate of the deal in doubt. He had promised prior to his election to dismantle the disastrous deal with Iran, although many believed he might instead adopt a more rigorous implementation of the agreement and tighten sanctions already in place. This could force Tehran to violate first or make the deal redundant.&nbsp;
    In January, he reluctantly&nbsp;waived a raft of sanctions&nbsp;against Iran as required by Congress every 120 days, but said this is a last chance and asked European countries to join with the United States in fixing significant flaws in the deal. The congressional deadline Trump faces this time is on 12 May, but he tweeted on Monday that he will&nbsp;announce his decision by Tuesday. Trump believes the agreement is a bad deal, which falls short of&nbsp;addressing Irans regional behaviouror its missile programme. He is emboldened by a group of Iran hawks in his inner circle, such as the&nbsp;national security adviser, John Bolton, and the&nbsp;secretary of state, Mike Pompeo.
    Read a full explainer here
    
   
  
  
 
The UK exports around 7% of steel production and 3% of aluminium to the US. Last week, despite reservations by the international trade secretary Liam Fox, the government announced it would join any EU action. 
On Iran, the battle now is to protect EU companies from US sanctions. The UK, France and Germany have signed a joint letter demanding that European companies are spared from US sanctions imposed on Iran after Trumps decision to pull out of the nuclear agreement with Tehran known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). 
 
  
  
  The prime minister, Theresa May, will want to restate her commitment to a rules-based international order at the G7 summit in Quebec, Canada. 
  Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters 
  
 
May, in her first face to face meeting with the world leaders who backed her by introducing diplomatic sanctions over the poisoning of the Skripals in Salisbury three months ago, will also want to restate her commitment to a rules-based international order, and her determination to prevent the normalisation of chemical weapons. 
She will also have the chance of a quiet word with both Angela Merkel the German Chancellor, and President Macron with little more than a fortnight to go before the EU summit. 
But the wider themes in Quebec are empowering women and girls and promoting a sustainable environment. May will call for a united front to press the industry to ensure women can use the web without fear of being subjected to online rape threats, harassment, cyberstalking, blackmail, vile comments and more. 
 
  
  
   
    
    If you have been affected you can share your stories with us, anonymously if you wish, by using our encrypted form here. We will feature some of your contributions in our reporting.
    
   
  
  
 
She wants the techniques now widely used to tackle online terrorist propaganda to be extended to end abuse targeted specifically at women and girls, in particular content promoting or depicting violence against women and girls, including illegal violent pornography and rape threats on social media platforms.  
May believes the UK has developed a pioneering legal framework to tackle online harms. The government is planning legislation on a mandatory social media code of practice, transparency reporting and online advertising. A white paper is due later this year. 
 
  
  
  The venue for the G7 summit, the Manoir Richelieu hotel, overlooks a robotic lawnmower making a final cut before politicians arrive. 
  Photograph: Chris Wattie/Reuters 
  
 
In remarks trailed in advance, the prime minister plans to say: What is illegal offline is illegal online and I am calling on world leaders to take serious action to deal with this, just like we are doing in the UK with our commitment to legislate on online harms such as cyberstalking and harassment. 
On World Oceans Day, Michael Gove, the environment secretary will also announce plans for increasing the number of marine conservation zones from 50 to 91. These will prevent activities such as dredging, or significant onshore or offshore development and stop existing harmful activities. 
The new zones are intended to protected species such as the short snouted seahorse, stalked jellyfish and peacocks tail seaweed and a dozen other exotically-named marine creatures. 
 
  Related: Tiny shrimp could influence global climate changes | John Abraham  
 
In Canada, May will urge collective action to tackle this shared environmental challenge. 
In her speech she will say: Marine plastics pollution is one of the greatest environmental challenges facing the world today.  
The UK government is a world leader on this issue, with our 25 Year Environment Plan setting out a clear ambition to eliminate avoidable plastic waste to protect our rivers and seas.  
There is an urgent need for greater global action and coordination on marine plastics pollution, including working with business, industry and non-governmental organisations to find innovative and effective solutions. 
This is a global problem, requiring global solutions."
"160""The Qubcois police have been erecting high steel fences this week, braced for the demonstrators who normally flock to G7 summits to rail against the leaders of the global liberal order behind the security perimeter.  The difference this year is that one of those leaders will be railing from the inside.  Donald Trump has let it be known he is coming to this years summit of the worlds rich liberal democracies spoiling for a fight, and he does not mind wrecking established practice and old alliances if it plays well among his supporters. This years conclave, opening on Friday, is being referred to as the G6 plus one, or the G7 minus one. It promises to be a showdown between the US president and everyone else. Usually by this point the sherpas, diplomats who prepare for the summit, are working on the punctuation in the final communique. This time no one knows whether there is enough common language to put together any kind of joint statement by the meetings end on Saturday. The Canadian host, Justin Trudeau, is seeking to make common cause with leaders from Europe and Japan against Trumps America First unilateralism  in particular, his use of tariffs against traditional trading partners under the pretext that their exports represent a security threat to the US. Trumps reference to the 1814 burning of the White House, in a phone call with the Canadian prime minister, to justify steel and aluminium tariffs two centuries later suggests that facts are unlikely to play a significant role in the looming row (the British were the actual arsonists) and that the US president is seeking to stoke the row rather than defuse it.     The capture and burning of Washington DC by the British in 1814. Photograph: Alamy    Trudeau, like his European colleagues Theresa May, Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron, and the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, are stymied.  On the one hand, public opinion at home demands they stand up to Trumps bullying. The imposition of tariffs is just the latest in a series of blows: Trump has already walked out of the Paris climate accord and abrogated the 2015 nuclear deal with Iran, imposing sanctions on any European company that continues to do business with Tehran. He has also broken with US allies in recognising Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. On the other hand, the Europeans, Canadians and Japanese cannot afford an escalation that turns into a full-blown trade war with a nation that accounts for more than half of the G7s combined GDP. They have little choice than to respond, but at the same time they are shooting themselves in the foot, said Sebastian Mallaby, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations thinktank. Everyone loses from this except China and Russia.  It is far from clear Trump will stay for the full two days of the summit, as he will be off to play a starring role in a historic encounter in Singapore with the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un. Before he goes, the US president will hold bilateral meetings with Macron and Trudeau, but there are no plans for him to meet Merkel or May. The summit will be a particularly sharp test for Trudeau. He has sought to promote a progressive agenda focusing on gender equality, and the health of the worlds oceans, but all that is likely to be swamped by the fight over trade. It will be Trumps first visit to Canada since he became president and comes as the uncertainty looming over the renegotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement has taken a toll on business investment in Canada. The US tariffs  described earlier this week by Trudeau as insulting  are expected to inflict further damage as Canada is the worlds top supplier of American steel. Trump is steadfastly disliked by most Canadians; in a recent poll  many described the US president as corrupt, arrogant and a liar. In the same poll around 40% of respondents described Trudeau as charismatic, but nearly a third saw him as weak  suggesting they want to see him take a tougher line with Trump. On Wednesday, Trudeau said he was preparing for heated exchanges at the summit. We know there will certainly be frank and at times difficult conversations around the G7 table, he told reporters. Particularly with the American president on trade, on tariffs. The last serious discord among the G7 was over George W Bushs invasion of Iraq. But the rift this time is sharper and broader. Even the UK is not siding with Washington. Trump is challenging the norms of western cohesion and rules-based trade that have been in place since the aftermath of the second world war. That is now what feels at stake. And thats what is different, Heather Conley, the director of the Europe programme at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies, said. This is a transition moving away from the 70-year-old system ... and were just moving to a new system. We just havent defined what that new system and who will lead it and the rules that will be."
"161""On a warm Tuesday evening, a dozen men gathered on couches at a Lululemon location in Toronto called The Local. Since last year, as an experiment to reach more male customers, the store has been home to The Huddle, a male bonding group which meets Tuesday nights after closing to work out, run, or meditate.  But once a month, the men circle up to talk about, well, their feelings.   Related: Can growing up without a father be a gift? Jay-Z thinks so    Downtempo jazz and cartons of maple sap water greeted me as I plunked myself down next to a young man who recently quit his job to become a freelance cinematographer. The evenings facilitator, Alex Cameron, a man with hulking, tattoo-plastered arms and slicked-back salt-and-pepper hair, told us the theme for this session: emotional literacy. Cameron, who is 40, runs a psychotherapy practice nearby. To start off, Joe, a slight man in a hoodie, volunteered a story about how he came to realize that vulnerability was a strength rather than weakness.  Ive never shared this in front of a group before, said Joe, 34, who told us the story of his mother passing away when he was three; how his dad became hardened and distant; and how, at the age of 27, he found himself in deep depression. I was single, in a job I hated, with very few friends I could count on. I felt like we are all going to die anyways, so whats the purpose of trying? Uncovering blocked emotions, Joe told us, saved his life.  I realized if I wasnt going to take my life, I had to go back in time and work through my feelings. I was a 27-year-old living in a little boys trauma. I needed to prove to myself that it was safe to feel again.    'Conversations with other men are usually very superficial. Most men suffer alone'  Marvin, at the Huddle     We went around the circle sharing whatever came to mind about manhood, emotions, relationships, Donald Trump, Justin Trudeau, Jordan Peterson, the fact that most mass shootings are committed by socially isolated white men. Conversations with other men are usually very superficial, said Marvin, a transplant from Germany who works at an ad agency. Its always about sex and money, the man next to him added. (Some of the participants declined to be named for this story.) Like, Oh, I got laid last night. It gets boring. Its not only fucking boring, its unhealthy, said Marvin. Most men suffer alone. The discussion shifted to the meaning of anger. I played football growing up and I learned that, as a man, you kept things inside so you could use them as a weapon. But emotions are energy and they have to move, they have to be released, said Chris, who recently returned from a chakra retreat in Belize. Many men never learn how to release that energy without using force. Anger is like an iceberg, Alex Cameron, the therapist leading the session, told us. Anger is what you see, but it comes from everything else below the surface  shame, fear, guilt. For most men, it feels safer to get angry than express sadness or vulnerability. He wrapped up on a more personal note. When I feel vulnerable, I cry. It looks like sadness on the outside, but it feels powerful.  Liberation from boys being boys Ive dropped in on The Huddle several times over the past six months. One meeting focused on mental health and substance abuse; a former drug addict shared the story of his attempted suicide and recent recovery. Another served as a #MeToo confessional. I bet every man in here has a story about how theyve mistreated a women, the facilitator prodded. After a deafening silence, one man threw up his hands. I know Ive done some foul shit.  I met a Reiki healer, a construction worker, a former professional soccer player, a gym owner, a bartender, and several social workers. The group appeared to attract mainly straight, unmarried men in their thirties who share interest in fashion, athletics, and wellness trends; the tattoo quotient of the participants was high. In a nation, and a neighborhood, that is predominantly white, The Huddle crowd skews about 50% black.  Lululemons dive into the murk of modern masculinity is a hipster-approved strand in a longer lineage of male reckoning. Alongside the din of women lib in the late 1960s was the lesser known mens liberation movement. Male liberation calls for men to free themselves from the sex role stereotypes that limit their ability to be human, wrote psychologist Jack Sawyer, an early proponent, in a 1970 issue of Liberation magazine. The battle of women to be free need not be a battle against men as oppressors. The choice about whether men are the enemy is up to men themselves.     As a man, you kept things inside so you could use them as a weapon. But emotions are energy and they have to move  Chris, at The Huddle     Today the pro-feminist mens movement champions causes ranging from reducing violence against women to raising awareness about male suicide and prostate cancer. Adherents dwell in gender studies programs, social justice groups, and mental health organizationsand in small groups of men who gather in coffee shops and living rooms for heartfelt talk.  Pro-feminist masculinity has remained relatively obscure, though #MeToo may be changing that. Its allowed male feminists like myself to come out of the shadows, Michael Kehler, a University of Calgary masculinities studies professor, told me by phone. His career, after two decades of quiet, diligent work to move this agenda forward, has flowered with media requests and speaking engagements. In January, Kehler became North Americas first masculinities studies research chair.  Until recently, there was an allowance, or even an expectation, for men to behave badly, like it was a natural way of being, Kehler said. [I]t was written off as boys being boys or thats just locker room talk. If you didnt talk about sports or engage in sexualizing banter, other men might question the adequacy of your masculinity.  Kehler believes this older breed of masculinity is dying. Some evidence, however, suggests otherwise. Pro-feminist men feel that by modulating hypermasculinity, and ceding a wider wedge of societal power to women, they can clear a path to male enlightenment  something good for men and women.  But a countermovement has gained steam. Known as the mens rights movement, these ad-hoc, mainly internet-based activists are resistant to policies promoting women equality and to the men-as-oppressors narrative generally. Oddly enough, the movements ideological godfather, Warren Farrell, was a well-known male feminist in the seventies who marched alongside Betty Friedan and Gloria Steinem. By the time Farrells 1993 book The Myth of Male Power arrived on shelves, his metamorphosis was complete: What we, as feminists, did is put men into the oppressor class and called it patriarchy, he once said of his previous self. While some strands of the mens rights movement tout their efforts to provide mens shelters, male-centric mental health services, and legal support in paternity cases, others are openly misogynist. Pussy is the only real empowerment women will ever know, wrote Paul Elam, the founder of AVoiceForMen.com, to promote the websites slap-a-violent-bitch month in 2017. Put all the hopelessly wishful thinking of feminist ideology aside and what remains is the fact that it is men and pretty much men only who draw power from accomplishment, who invent technology, build nations, cure disease, create empires and generally advance civilization.  Elams online community has been deemed a hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center. ReturnOfKings.com, a blog for pickup artists (men focused on manipulating women into sex), has also earned this distinction. The websites founder, Daryush Valizadeh, even suggested rape should be legal if done on private property.  Also in the constellation of mens rights groups are incels  men who blame women for their inability to attract a mate. (The word is a contraction of involuntary celibate.) The online subculture reached notoriety in April when 25-year-old Alek Minassian drove into two dozen pedestrians in Toronto. Eight of the 10 killed were women. The Incel Rebellion has already begun, Minassian posted on Facebook moments before he rammed his rental van into a Yonge Street sidewalk. Black kids cant afford therapy - we have to fix ourselves Jahmal Padmore, one of the organizers of The Huddle, believes that blaming women, or anyone, does not dissolve ones woes so much as harden them.  The bespectacled, well-muscled 34-year-old gently badgers his male friends to show up for The Huddle because he knows firsthand how difficult it is to reach out for support.  Black kids cant afford therapy  if were going to get fixed, we have to do it ourselves, Padmore, the son of Antiguan immigrants, told me. So I just went on YouTube and watched a lot of personal development videos.  Padmores craving for self-discovery accelerated as he approached his 30th birthday. He was drinking heavily and had some brushes with mental illness. One day he came across a series of videos by the University of Toronto psychology professor Jordan Peterson, focused on mens pain. Padmore was hooked  briefly.      Jordan Peterson, the University of Toronto psychology professor. Photograph: Carlos Osorio/Toronto Star via Getty Images    Peterson talked about finding your personal capacity within. I love that, thats real, thats what a lot of young men are looking for. When guys are maturing and coming to terms with the fact that theyre not going to be an NBA star, or whatever dreams or expectations they had arent being fulfilled, it can be painful. And because were men, were socialized to not express those feelings of frustration in a healthy way. In the early 2010s, the eccentric professor was known for TedX talks with innocuous, New Age titles like Potential and Redefining Reality. But Peterson also had a reputation for blistering attacks on male laziness  Clean up your room! he often barks at his young followers  and criticizing political correctness.    The problem I have with Jordan Peterson is that finding your personal [capabilities] comes at the expense of others  Jahmal Padmore     In 2016 Petersons viral popularity exploded after he protested Bill C-16, legislation adding gender identity to the characteristics protected by Canadian anti-discrimination law. The publication of his book 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote to Chaos in January this year vaulted Peterson into international stardom. While Peterson maintains the persona of a self-help guru styled as a stern but loving father figure  To stand up straight with your shoulders back is to accept the terrible responsibility of life, he writes  the threads of intolerance in his work, and the rhetoric of some of his followers, teeter toward hate. In a recent New York Times profile, Peterson surmised that the Toronto van attacker was angry at God because women were rejecting him. He suggested enforced monogamy as a societal cure for incels and other disgruntled young men. Peterson has never hidden his view that women should submit to conventional gender roles, but in May he published a chummy 90-minute interview with Warren Farrell, cementing his affinity with the mens rights movement. Padmore sensed these threads years before they were making headlines. The problem I have with Jordan Peterson and his ilk is that, for them, finding your personal [capabilities] comes at the expense of others. I have a huge issue with the tendency to blame women and trans people and anyone that doesnt conform. Go deep, try to find out more about yourself  of course  but dont drag other people down.  Another reason he quickly fell from the orbit of Petersons charisma: Im black. Petersons fan base, which is 84 % male according to the data analytics firm Zoomph, is well-steeped in racist alt-right culture. He does not endorse the extreme right-wing movement, but its no coincidence that it has largely endorsed him, while the pro-feminist mens movement has not. But can Lululemon make it cool?   s pro-feminist mens community.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"644\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Jeff Perera, a figure in Torontos pro-feminist mens community. Photograph: Gary William Ogle for the Guardian    Doing pro-feminist mens work under corporate auspices comes with certain pitfalls. The Huddle is free of charge, but when Padmore shouts Hit me up if you want a discount on some stretchy pants, one cant but feel like the target of a sophisticated marketing scheme. The corporation in question also has some skeletons in its closet. You know, feminists really hate Lululemon, my wife said when I mentioned The Huddle. She referred me to an article urging women to drop [their] Lululemon obsession. Lululemons founder, Chip Wilson, once suggested that breast cancer rates rose in the nineties because of cigarette-smoking Power Women who were on the pilland taking on the stress previously left to men in the working world. He said that Lululemon clothing was not for plus-sized or even average-sized women. In 2015, after being forced to recall a number of yoga pants with a conspicuous defect  they became see-through in the crotch after a short period of use  Wilson resigned. In 2016, a supervisor at a Lululemon in California was accused of raping a female co-worker. The victims lawsuit painted the company as a haven for sexual predators  a place, BuzzFeed wrote, where women are encouraged to wear tight clothes to work, lewd comments go unchecked, and hookups between bosses and subordinates are accepted as par for the course after a wild night of drinking. This February, Wilsons replacement as CEO, Laurent Potdevin, was also forced out for misconduct, possibly because of a relationship with a subordinate. (Further details have not yet emerged.) When I contacted Lululemon headquarters to ask how the company reconciled its brand identity as a beacon of yogic enlightenment with its reputation as a bastion of toxic masculinity, a PR rep supplied me with a statement attributed to Ben Stubbington, senior vice president of mens design: At Lululemon we live in practice. This is translated literally on the yoga mat and also in all ways we walk in life. [] As the definitions of masculinity constantly evolve in society, we embrace deconstructing its traditional confines, working to the principle that addressing vulnerability is a strength and has immense power to give back. Padmore, unwilling to defend the company, took a more prosaic stance. Im not particularly concerned with Lululemons past, present, or future image; Im concerned with showing up and doing things that impact peoples lives in a positive way. He said he hasnt seen any signs of a culture of toxic masculinity at the company since being hired a year ago. The righteous arent immune to hypocrisy, he added. I think a lot of liberal white folks get caught up in perfection. Youre going to make mistakes, youre going to fuck up. But I think you have to be okay with that and keep pushing forward. If the various mens movement subcultures are in competition for followers, the pro-feminist folks are losing badly. Jordan Peterson has 1.2 million followers on YouTube and more than 700,000 on Twitter. Prominent pro-feminist male personalities count four or five digits at most. Jeff Perera, a figure in Torontos pro-feminist mens community, told me he hasnt won any converts from the Peterson camp, but has occasionally lost friends who converted to the other side. We put out a lot of statistics about the unfortunate realities women go through, which are important for men to hear, Perera said. The problem is a lot of men dont want to hear some expert telling them what a shitty person they are. Theyre like, Yeah, I wasnt planning on raping anyone today, so peace out. Around the time Trump was elected, Perera, 42, worked part-time for Next Gen Men, a non-profit that works with teenage boys to get them thinking outside the gender box. During one afterschool program at an elite prep school outside Toronto, the conversation, Perera recalled, turned to the new US president. I described him as the televangelist of toxic masculinity. I said to the guys, Hes like Cobra Commander from GI Joe  he has to have his supervillain logo on everything from his helicopter to his evil headquarters at Trump Tower. One of the boys looked at me with kind of a deadpan stare, and was like, Thats actually kind of cool. It was this moment where I had a crisis of faith. I realized that the movement is failing. The coolness quotient of the pro-feminist mens world, at least in the eyes of the average adolescent male, is rather low. Attendees of the annual conference put on by the National Organization of Men Against Sexism are likely to be treated to rousing renditions of songs like Let the women In You Come Through or Womb Envy. One can imagine howls of laughter from 16-year-olds forced to sing along to Its Only A Wee-Wee, So Whats the Big Deal? Which is why it may not be a bad thing for a trendy, globally recognized brand, however imperfect, to take up the torch. Jian Pablico, who originated The Huddle at Lululemons Vancouver headquarters, told me his role as a mindful performance manager is to curate non-traditional masculinity for men who may not be part of that culture yet. Thats why the touchy-feely talks are held only one day a month. We wanted to find a way to bring people together who might be hesitant about showing up for a conversation on vulnerability, Pablico said. Sweating together first helps it come naturally. Once you suffer together in a workout, you begin to bond and a layer of the mask comes off. Its then a little easier to chat afterwards over a beer. Or a kombucha. *** Jordan Peterson views feminism as an emasculating force. He believes men ought to be allowed to be unapologetically tough, ambitious, competitive, and forceful. But no one in the pro-feminist camp has really suggested that men cant be tough, ambitious, competitive, or forceful  only that it is unhealthy to suppress other ways of being. After his Huddle session on emotional literacy, Alex Cameron, the therapist, showed me his tattoos. Id assumed they were a relic from some previous life as a bouncer or lumberjack. It turns out he got them on graduating his masters in social work. One arm depicts a dragon, symbol of virility; the other, a phoenix, which in Chinese mythology signifies feminine grace.We have opposing sides within us, Cameron said. Harmony, he believes, must come from embracing our entire self."
"162""New research from the US Census Bureau shows something a bit strange in the era of powerful feminist organizing. Apparently when women earn more than their husbands, both spouses lie about it. About one in four heterosexual couples that the census looked at had wives that earned more than their husbands. In those cases, though, husbands over-reported their income while their wives under-reported their own. (The census sorted all this out when it matched couples answers to their actual IRS filings.)  Now, we cant know for sure why the exaggeration happens  perhaps couples want to present themselves as more traditional to the census, maybe husbands feel insecure about making less or wives are anxious that their salary difference will emasculate their spouse. Whatever the reason, though, it serves as a good reminder that its not just political equality we need to fight for  its equality in the culture, and our relationships.     If we dont have parity in our homes, we wont have it in our country    If we dont have parity in our homes, we wont have it in our country. And if men and women arent even comfortable talking about equality, how can we expect anyone to fight for it? The truth is that with all the cultural gains made by feminists, there is still a long way to go in the domestic sphere. Women still do the vast amount of childcare, housework, as well as the mental labor that goes into running a home  and thats regardless of whether they have a full-time job or not.  And while American men are more progressive generally about housework than in years past, there are still some issues that they remain staunchly conservative on  like women changing their name. A 2017 study, for example, pointed out that 70% of Americans believe women should change their last name if they get married, and a whopping 50% believed that it should be against the law for them to do otherwise.  Even for progressive men, theres a difference between believing in or fighting for equality in the public sphere, and living by those values in your own home. I worry that in a time when so much of our energy is going towards the vast political battles, that well neglect the cultural progress women still need to make. A tremendous part of the rights strategy right now is  incredibly, considering their president  about family values. Theyre telling their supporters that progressives and feminists have gone too far; theyre pushing for a regressive vision of America that very much includes men being the heads of state and the heads of households. If thats where their focus is  ours should be too.   Related: The 'pro-life' conservatives' hypocrisy over children makes me sick | Jessica Valenti    Of course it makes sense that were worried about the supreme court, or the rollback of abortion rights and harassment in the workplace. These issues have become even more urgent since Trump took office, and we cant afford to ignore them.  But if this latest research from the census shows us anything, its that even in one of feminisms most powerful moments, women still internalize messages about what is acceptable female behavior. And that decades after we started fighting for equal pay, the idea that women could outearn their partners is still considered taboo or undesirable.  Falling back into traditional gender roles is easy when youre busy worrying about other things. So even in the face of political overwhelm, lets not forget the fight at home  literally.  Sign up for Jessica Valentis weekly newsletter on feminism and sexism     "
"163""The mother of a seven-year-old girl who cried every day because she was forced to wear a skirt to school is hoping to bring a legal challenge against the governments uniform guidance, which she says is leading to discrimination.   Related: Dont ban skirts in school. Let everybody wear them | Ellie Mae OHagan    Every morning for nearly three years Roberta Borsotti wiped the tears from her daughters face as she railed against her schools strict no-trousers policy for girls, asking repeatedly: If boys and teachers can wear trousers, why cant I?  After threatening legal action, Borsotti finally convinced her daughters school, a Catholic primary in south-west London, to alter its uniform policy. Now shes taking legal action against the Department for Education because she says she does not want other children to suffer in the way her daughter has. Although there have been legal challenges on school uniform policies against individual schools, it is the first time such a challenge has been brought against the government, whose guidance is described by some lawyers as defective and not fit for purpose. In my opinion, the school acted in that way because it lacked proper guidance, said Borsotti, a mother of three. It cost me and my family, my daughter in particular, years of distress and frustration.   I do not wish for any child or their families to suffer the same and it is my aim that no one again will have to go through what my daughter went through, whether they want to wear trousers or skirts.   Related: At least 120 schools adopt gender-neutral uniforms, charity says    Borsotti and her family are crowdsourcing funding to bring a judicial review against the government. Their legal action will be watched closely by parents and schools across England where school uniform has become an increasingly fraught issue. Enforcement of uniform policies has become more rigorous in recent years with pupils frequently sent home for failing to comply with the strict dress codes favoured by many schools, in particular academies, who are independent of local authorities. Growing awareness about transgender pupils has also led to changes to uniform policies. This week it emerged that at least 40 secondary schools had banned skirts for girls and introduced a policy of smart trousers for all. At Philips high school in Bury, pupils have started a petition against a trousers-only policy for new pupils from September and all pupils from the following year.  We feel more confident wearing a skirt and school trousers are unflattering, the petition reads. Self-esteem issues are on the rise among teenagers, so making us unable to wear clothes we feel our best in will damage our mental health, and in turn our school performance. Transgender campaigners have rejected the trousers-for-all approach and argued that all pupils should be able to choose between a skirt or trousers, as they are at Brighton College, a private day and boarding school which has scrapped distinctions between boys and girls uniforms. Elly Barnes, the chief executive of Educate and Celebrate, which works to help schools to become LGBT+ friendly, said: What we always advocate is that students have a choice. We want any child at any school to be free to wear what they feel most comfortable in. Borsottis case is that the Equality Act 2010 makes it unlawful for a public authority to discriminate against a student on the ground of the students sex. Yet because of a lack of clarity in the government guidance, she says girls are still being forced to wear a skirt or a dress in many schools which amounts to discrimination.  Uniform policies for girls do not have to be about trousers versus skirts, she said. The uniform policies should give girls equality in uniform choice and clearly state their right to wear what they are most comfortable with. Skirts or trousers are both perfectly acceptable. Business women wear trousers, female politicians wear them. Theres nothing immoral about trousers. I dont understand why it needs to be such a big issue in schools. The DfE says it is up to individual schools to decide on uniform policy; its role is to offer guidance to help schools understand how the Equality Act affects them and how to fulfil their duties under the act on a variety of matters ncluding on the issue of uniform. Lawyers argue however that the guidance fails to make clear that inflexible school uniform policies that do not allow girls to wear trousers or shorts like their male counterparts, or which enforce trousers-only rules on girls are unlawful and they think the government should clarify its advice.  Borsottis daughter is now much happier going to school  in shorts during the summer and trousers in the winter. Her mother says she never felt like herself in a skirt. When it was finally announced that girls could wear trousers, she rushed home, grabbed a pair of scissors and cut up her school dress into tiny pieces. She now says she feels less worried about running around, said Borsotti. Before she was thinking more about what she was doing because the dress might get caught in something. She feels more free now. A DfE spokesperson said: Decisions about school uniform are made at a local level by school leaders, who are best placed to ensure these policies meet the needs of their pupils. To support school leaders, the department issues best practice guidance. We back schools to take these decisions, but we would expect them to consult parents and pupils and ensure their policies comply with equalities law."
"164""A theatre company has cast two Shakespeare plays with all male actors, claiming the controversial move was an attempt to explore gender equality in the age of #MeToo and #timesup. The Pop-up Globe theatre in Auckland will stage Richard III and The Taming of the Shrew in November, but a decision to cast only male actors has drawn criticism for being discriminatory, bizarre and tone-deaf.  The new season has been named by the theatre the abuse of power season, followed by the hashtags #MeToo and #TimesUp in promotional literature.   Related: Work less, get more: New Zealand firm's four-day week an 'unmitigated success'    The theatre says they have staged and cast the plays as they would have appeared in Shakespeares day more than 400 years ago in Elizabethan England, despite claiming on their website that the company isnt dusty old Shakespeare. Its now. Alive. Like a party. In the age of Weinstein, #MeToo and #TimesUp, it feels entirely right for us to reflect current conversations in the world through ambitious and thought-provoking programming. As is so often the case, Shakespeare seems to have got there first, said Pop-Up Globe founder and artistic director Miles Gregory in a press release announcing the new season. When it comes to the gender debate weve never been shy, and neither was Shakespeare ... Our audiences will not be disappointed with the treatment weve given to these global issues. Gregory later told Radio New Zealand: To perform it all-male with a feminist reading is intriguing. Itll be very funny but itll also make you think. But gender equality campaigners failed to see the humour in the casting, saying the theatres decision to market the plays as an exploration of the #MeToo movement was cynical and flawed.    So the Pop-up Globe is using the MeToo movement and the abuse of power to market its new season, while simultaneously including a &quot;proto-feminist play&quot; performed by an all-male cast, and dropping their all-female cast production... erm...&mdash; Erin Banks (@ErinRBanks) July 17, 2018      I wish I could say #notallmen, but Pop-up Globe&#39;s #MeToo Taming of the Shrew is #allmale. You can&#39;t just slap a &#39;proto-feminist&#39; label on the play and avoid scrutiny - its misogyny and abuse can be normalised and played for laughs as equally as it can be exposed and critiqued.&mdash; James Wenley (@JamesWenley) July 17, 2018    Female actors and directors also pointed out that casting all men meant female actors lost out on parts and work.  The company has since apologised. It has become very clear that referencing these movements has offended and upset many people, some deeply ... I believe theatre is fundamentally about celebrating the diversity of the human condition. said Gregory in a twitter statement. We are a young organisation, we are learning, and we dont get everything right. It is clear that today we havent. The Pop-Up Globe will also perform Measure for Measure and Hamlet in the new season, plays they have cast with both men and women."
"165""Gary Lineker has become the BBCs highest paid on-air talent and is the only one of the corporations big name male stars not to take a pay cut. Lineker, who fronts the BBCs football coverage, is paid between 1.75m and 1.76m a year, supplanting at the top of the pay list the Radio 2 presenter Chris Evans, whose 2.2m salary has been reduced to 1.66m-1.67m, partly as a result of quitting the BBC2 show Top Gear.   Related: BBC faces backlash as only two women in its top 20 best-paid stars    A number of others have taken pay cuts  including the Today programme presenter John Humphrys, Radio 5 Lives Nicky Campbell and the BBC News anchor Huw Edwards  as part of BBC efforts to redress a significant gender pay gap among on-air talent.  However Lineker, who will not be fronting coverage of Englands World Cup semi-final against Croatia because ITV have exclusive showing rights, has not taken a cut. Tony Hall, the BBC director general, said that with the vast sums paid to those on and off the field in the world of sport, the corporation has no choice but to pay Lineker accordingly to retain him.    After 4 weeks in Moscow, I finally get to go to a game. And what a game. Come on England. &mdash; Gary Lineker (@GaryLineker) July 11, 2018    Lineker is doing the most amazing job and I hope he will do an amazing job when England are in the final on the weekend, said Hall. There is always going to be one or two people where the market for what they do is absolutely real, visceral.  When we are talking about a Lineker  we are talking about someone who has the option of going somewhere else and doing it. And there are people out there bidding for someone like that. The BBCs third-best paid star was Graham Norton, in the 600,000 to 610,000 bracket, fourth is the BBC Radio 2 presenter Steve Wright, on 550,000 to 560,000, with Edwards fifth, on 520,000 to 530,000. Of the 12 new entrants to make the list of those paid 150,000 or more, eight are women. The name to cause the most disgruntled murmurs in the BBC newsroom was Amol Rajan, a former editor of the Independent who joined two years ago as media editor, who is paid 200,000 to 210,000.  This is the same as veterans such as Jeremy Bowen, the BBCs Middle East editor, and more than Katya Adler, the BBCs Europe editor, another new entrant."
"166""Education, education, education is a common refrain that black young people hear from family and community members. Work hard in school, go to university and graduate into a better life than the previous generation. Education is meant to be the great equaliser, our inoculation against ethnic penalty in the workplace  one of the most vicious symptoms of racism. But the latest research provides a damning indictment of this view. Between 2007 and 2017, black male graduates earned a staggering 7,000 less per year than their white counterparts. The same study showed that black male participation has increased in higher education by 24%, compared with a 15% rise for white men. So, black men have been more likely to invest in higher education, even though the returns are diminished. We have become so used to the idea that we have to work twice as hard to get half as far that we now take it for granted. The lastest findings replicate what we know about racism and the labour market. Black graduates, regardless of gender, are less likely to be employed after graduation and subject to severe ethnic penalties in the job market. Part of the reason for this discrimination in Britain is because of inequalities in the university system. Black people are far less likely to receive a good degree and much more likely to go to less prestigious universities, which are both key barriers to finding a well-paid graduate job. But there is&#xa0;also the truth that the job market has always been discriminatory. The government had to bring in the Race Relations Act in 1965 in order to protect ethnic minorities from racial discrimination. Even though the act has been strengthened numerous times, there is regular evidence that employers continue to discriminate, on the basis of foreign-sounding names, for&#xa0;example. The unfortunate truth is that it is delusional to pretend that racism can be overcome by amassing more qualifications. Much wider shifts in society are necessary to ensure equality for all."
"167""Theres a hpou (a childs toy), tayat ywa (mango leaf) and mout paung (sweets). Pausing in her list of euphemisms, Dr Thet Su Htwe leans in to the microphone. And even samosa, she adds. At this, the rapt audience of young women gathered at her workshop shrieks and bursts into chatter. 
Why are we still afraid to say the word vagina? the doctor asks finally. 
 
 
  Related: The Upside  sign up for our weekly email  
 
Talking about vaginas  not to mention sex education  is taboo in Myanmar. But it became the focus of discussion two months ago when The Vagina Monologues  a play of 18 stories about women experiences and their vaginas, exploring issues of menstruation, gender roles, relationships and gender-based violence  was performed for the first time in Yangon.  
Su Htwe usually keeps a low profile, but for one weekend, as she was invited to speak at the performances, her sexuality and reproductive health classes came to the fore. She warned that if people cannot even bring themselves to talk about vaginas then women rights will not improve. 
 
  
  
   
     
    
    News doesn't always have to be bad  indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do.
    This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come.
    Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com
    
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
  Sign up here for weekly email updates from this series
  
 
In Myanmar, sexual and reproductive education technically exists on the curriculum in state schools  but a combination of teacher ignorance and embarrassment means that little is actually taught. 
Parents and teachers think that if you teach sexual education you will encourage kids to become sexually active, so there is a big education gap, Su Htwe says. 
She founded her organisation, Strong Flowers, which provides reproductive and sexual health education services and resources, in 2016. Su Htwe teaches in schools and community centres, and across religions. 
At first I was worried that people might say this Muslim lady is talking about sex; no Im not talking about sex, I am teaching about sexuality, our bodies, consent  I was worried people would be confused and think I am doing something that is not good for the society, or for religions. 
 
  
  
  The classes explore gender roles, reproductive health, relationships and gender-based violence. 
  Photograph: Libby Hogan 
  
 
women rights are also slow to progress in Myanmar. Despite five years of debate, a law that criminalises violence against women still has not been submitted to parliament. Participants attend Su Htwes classes for a variety of reasons. Aye Aye Tint, 33, was interested to learn more about health: I learned more than just the dos and donts about my health, like if a husband has a sore on his private part, he should openly tell his wife to prevent the disease. 
I also learned about how couples should behave, not just personal hygiene, she said. 
 
  Related: Baby blues: rural Myanmars desperate need for family planning services  
 
After the workshop she said she shared the training with her single and married friends, they told me they should have attended the training too, because they need it and dont even know things like the different parts of the uterus. 
Twenty-four-year-old La Min Ko from Myeik, in southern Myanmar, who attended one of the classes led by Su Htwe, said: Before the training, to be honest, I didnt think the subjects were so important for us. But I learned so much about gender equality, human rights, emotional intelligence and sexuality. 
Su Htwe learned that it was different for girls at a young age. After puberty, her mother forbade her from running out in the streets with her friends.  
I was told I cant wash my hair or eat spicy food like lapet tho (tealeaf salad), or else it would cease my menstruation, she said. 
When boys and girls enter puberty, the space is narrower for girls and wider for boys. Boys are told they have to get ready to lead the family and study hard, and for girls going outside is dangerous, we are told anything could happen to you at any time  violence, rape or sexual harassment on the streets. 
 
  
  At first I wasnt sure whether to call it just reproductive health, as to use the word sexuality might scare people 
   
   Dr Thet Su Htwe 
   
  
 
After finishing school she became a doctor and volunteered at the Muslim free hospital. Again she realised the relationship between cultural gender expectations and treatment of women. 
When she was preparing to get married, another tipping point occurred. She was passionate about working as a medical doctor and did not want to give up her profession, despite the cultural expectation in Myanmar that a women should give up her job and dedicate herself to family life. 
After raising the topic with her husband, she was surprised to hear that he was supportive of her choice. This confirmed her belief that it was her responsibility to educate people about women rights, challenging cultural expectations, and she believed the best way she could do this was through education. 
Su Htwes first class was not in any of the big cities, but rather in a small village outside Yangon. 
She divided the group into two classes, one for women and one for men, for anyone aged 16 and upwards.  
At first I wasnt sure whether to call it just reproductive health, as to use the word sexuality might scare people or make them reluctant to come. After a friend told her to believe in herself and be bold, she explained all aspects of her class to the local community leaders, and they welcomed it. 
 
 s rights are slow to progress.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"667\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  Myanmar has experienced rapid economic growth, but women rights are slow to progress. 
  Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
  
 
Her first supporter was an older male farmer harvesting chillies at the time of the class. He said he could only give two days for the class, but because he thought it was important to talk about our bodies he would encourage his wife and daughter to come to the classes too. 
To illustrate how poor knowledge is, she reveals how many women have been using the emergency contraceptive pill for regular use.  
I kept on being asked about where they can buy the three-day pill, but I said I didnt know what they meant, then they described that you can take one pill and have sex for three days without getting pregnant, she said. 
Su Htwe believes education is the first step to building respect for each others bodies, learning about the similarities and differences, leading to respect for women rights: We need to educate women, what are your rights? And raise awareness, not only among women but nationwide, and among men. 
She hopes training for teachers in teaching life skills, sexual health and respectful relationships, will improve. We cant do this with just one talk, we also all need to work together. 
This article is part of a series on possible solutions to some of the worlds most stubborn problems. What else should we cover? Email us at theupside@theguardian.com"
"168""Cuba is set to become the latest country in Latin America to approve gay marriage, after the National Assembly on Sunday signed off on a new constitution that defines marriage as the consensual union of two people, regardless of gender.  The new constitution, known as the Magna Carta  which also recognises private property for the first time since the Cold War  will be put to a referendum later this year. The news was met with elation by the LGBTQ community, many of whom were hopeful but not certain the measure would pass.   Related: Cuba ditches aim of building communism from draft constitution    This is marvellous, said Pablo Navarro, 70, who spent two years cutting sugar cane in a correctional labour camp in the 1960s because of his sexuality. I feel proud that the new generation can enjoy this achievement even though we couldnt. Its a really important step forward, said Yeandro Tamayo, 40, a gay theatre director from Havana, who watched the National Assembly debate the issue live on television. Ive never been interested in marriage, now they they have approved it, I might get married myself! Legislators voted unanimously for the new constitution, replacing the current constitutions definition of marriage as the voluntary union between a man and women. The new constitution does not explicitly address the question of whether gay couples can adopt children, although experts say this will now likely be possible. Prior to the vote, popular campaigns both in favour of and against same-sex marriage led to rare, open political debate on the Communist-ruled island.  Five of Cubas evangelical denominations published an open letter in June declaring that marriage is exclusively the union of man and women and that the ideology of gender has no relation with our culture, our struggles, or with the historic leaders of the Revolution. Posters appeared in Havana featuring a husband and wife with two children that read: I am in favour of original design  the family as God created it.     A poster opposing gay marriage is wrapped around a pole in Havana. Photograph: STRINGER/Reuters    The pro-gay marriage campaign was led by Mariela Castro, the director of the National Centre for for Sex Education (CENESEX), a lawmaker, and daughter of former President Ral Castro. CENESEX organised the Conga against Homophobia and Transphobia in March, in which thousands of revellers danced among gay pride flags and Fidel Castro banners. This officialista campaign was accompanied by a small group of around 100 LGBT activists who lobbied on social media, ran queer cinema screenings, and staged public performance art.  CENESEX has been educating and lobbying on this issue since 2007 and has been the main force here, but all of our actions have played a role, said feminist militant Marta Mara Ramirez, 42, through joyous tears. The National Assembly is now responding to specific demands of the people and not only to their own experiences as bureaucrats. Cubas about-face on gay rights has been in train for decades.Employment discrimination because of sexual orientation is illegal in both the state and private sector. Legislation enacted earlier this year allows for steep fines and even the suspension of licenses for private employers who discriminate because of gender, race or sexuality. Sex-change operations were legalised in 2008 and are carried out at no cost to the patient. Cuban surgeons performed dozens last year. Elsewhere in Latin America and the Caribbean, same-sex marriage is legal in Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, and Colombia. But homosexuality remains a criminal offence in seven Caribbean island nations."
"169""Cast out, marginalised and even murdered, transgender people in Pakistan used to have to rely on their wits to survive. Now they are running for parliament. 
The country is conservative and deeply religious and homosexuality is illegal, but it has nonetheless introduced laws that are at the global forefront of trans rights. Pakistan has officially recognised a third gender since 2009. 
Laws were liberalised still further in March with a wide-ranging piece of legislation that grants intersex people, eunuchs and trans men and women the option to self-identify their gender on official forms. A person born male can now hold a female passport. 
In contrast, the UK requires a citizen to be diagnosed with gender dysphoria and have lived for at least two years in their chosen gender. 
The ruling means a lot to Zara. Kneeling on a mattress that takes up most of the floor of her concrete home, she reaches into a fake alligator-skin purse and pulls out a green identity card, and tears well up. On the card, Zaras gender is marked as X. 
 
  
  
  Our appearance is different, so why should we have male on our identity card? asked Zara. 
  Photograph: Memphis Barker 
  
 
I was born with a very small male organ. Inside, my feelings are female, the 35-year-old said. I want to live like a women, cook and do domestic work.  
Our appearance is different, so why should we have to have male on our identity card? 
There are 13 trans candidates to choose from in Wednesdays election. Nadeem Kashish, a 35-year-old transgender women running for office in Islamabad, smokes a cigarette on the street below her makeup studio.  
Banished from home, she entered the guru system, in which an elder khwaja sira houses younger trans people in return for a cut of their earnings as dancers or sex workers. She wants that system abolished, saying it is exploitative. 
When you see a transgender person, do not give them your notes, give them your votes, Kashish advised listeners to her weekly radio show. 
The trans community in Pakistan is divided between a young, international-leaning cohort who believe gender is fluid, and an older group who claim only those born with both female and male genitalia truly qualify.  
Almas Boby, who launched the countrys trans rights movement by storming a police station in 2004 to call for the arrest of dirty men, argued that the law would merely encourage gay men to claim they were transgender in order to claim benefits. 
 
  
  
  Almas Boby, who launched the trans rights movement in Pakistan. 
  Photograph: Memphis Barker 
  
 
There were 10,000 khwaja siras counted in the census, she said, referring to the official exercise conducted last year, thought by many to have recorded only a fraction of the community. After this there will be millions, billions. 
One reason for the growing acceptance of the trans community springs from an unlikely source - Pakistans mullahs. The Council of Islamic Ideology, a government body that has deemed nine-year-old girls old enough to marry and approves the right of men to lightly beat their wives, has offered some support to trans rights.  
Its chair, Dr Qibla Ayaz, noted a trans person, Heet, appears in the hadith  the sayings, actions and pronouncements of the prophet Muhammad.  
In practice, Pakistani law forbids discrimination against trans people. It mandates vocational training and enshrines the right to run for political office.  
Mehlab Jameel , a trans activist in Lahore, said: Grassroots activists have worked so hard over the years to make this possible. As a result, Pakistan has among the most progressive, inclusive and culturally sensitive legislation in the world, she added. 
 
  
  
   
     
    
    News doesn't always have to be bad  indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do.
    This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come.
    Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com
    
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
  Sign up here for weekly email updates from this series
  
 
Trans people have lived for centuries on the margins of society on the subcontinent. Many consider their sexual ambiguities to be God-given, meaning khwaja siras are sought out as intermediaries to the divine and are able to offer curses or blessings.  
Wedding parties often hire khwaja siras to dance, and indeterminate gender is considered useful in areas where women are forbidden from leaving the house.  
But trans people are typically cast out by their families, and many of the estimated 500,000 in the country end up as beggars or sex workers. Fifty-eight have been murdered in the past three years Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province alone. 
Sceptics of the law note that Pakistan regularly fails to implement positive-sounding legislation. Many of the provisions require the involvement of the four provincial governments, none of which have passed its own version of the law or allocated any funding for trans issues this year.  
That could mean the trans-specific shelters required by the legislation, for example, exist primarily on paper, said Qasim Iqbal of the trans charity Blue Veins. 
Zara still hopes the laws provision of easy loan schemes could revive her business selling mobile phones. Her long, auburn hair had become a familiar sight to traders at Aabpara market in Islamabad, but her previous lack of an ID card meant the shop she ran for 13 years was recently seized without notice by the landlord. She needs money to start up again. 
 
  
  
  Trans activists take part in a demonstration in Karachi. 
  Photograph: Asif Hassan/AFP/Getty 
  
 
The overall momentum leads Zara to picture a brighter future. I want to wear women clothes all the time, she said, her bland male outfit contrasting with pictures on the wall of her in bright, patterned dresses. Im hopeful that one day we will live that freely. 
This article is part of a series on possible solutions to some of the worlds most stubborn problems. What else should we cover? Email us at theupside@theguardian.com"
"170""Approximately 20,000 people who wanted to march at the Pride parade in London on Saturday have been told they are not allowed to do so, in a move the marchs co-founder Peter Tatchell has alleged amounts to anti-LGBT+ discrimination. 
About 50,000 people applied to march, but organisers set a limit of 30,000 at the event, which is authorised by the mayor of London, Westminster council and the Metropolitan police.  
The organisers confirmed that 115 groups applied after the cut-off date for applications three months ago and would not be able to march. 
 
  Related: The truth about Stonewall  the LGBT group that won't support London Pride  
 
Tatchell said twice the number of people marched last weekend at Dublins Pride than would march in London on Saturday and that 50,000 people were allowed to march in central London in support of the NHS on 30 June. 
The limit on the size of Pride feels like anti-LGBT+ discrimination, the veteran campaigner said. There are no similar restrictions placed on the numbers at the Notting Hill carnival, which is many times larger than Pride. 
However, the organisers estimate that 1 million people will head into the area to watch the parade, which they stress is not the same as a political march in which there are no spectators.  
They said that in order to expand the march they would need to raise more than the 1m the parade currently costs, to hire more stewards and satisfy licence requirements.  
The event coincides with the England v Sweden World Cup quarter-final and Alison Camps, co-chair of Pride in London, said: We obviously wish the England team all the best. We are hoping that all the rainbows, unicorns and glitter will work their magic and send good vibes over to Russia. 
There will be a record 472 groups taking part but a recent survey by Pride in London found Britons care more about animal rights than LGBT rights.  
Theres a real danger in this country that people assume that the battle is over and that the job is done, Camps said. We are seeing hate crime increase and the media attacking parts of our community, most notably the trans community. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
Tatchell helped set up the first London Pride march but said the size and spontaneity of the parade was now being strangled by regulations, bureaucracy, red tape and the unreasonable dictates of the city authorities. 
The parade is licensed by the mayor of London, Westminster city council, Transport for London and organised with the help of the Metropolitan police. 
Tatchell said that in the 1990s 100,000 people marched and would do so again if restrictions were lifted. He also said the parade was dominated by corporate floats, many of which have been de-gayed and dont mention LGBT+, only Pride. 
London Pride, which organises the event, said allowing everyone who wanted to march to do so was not practical at present and that if they did so the parade could take nine hours. 
A spokesperson said it would continue to review after each years event and will work closely with our partners on ways to safely increase the size of the parade. One of the many elements we need to consider is that the 30,000 people participating are looked after by a team of over 500 volunteer stewards who are working shifts of up to 10 hours. If the capacity was increased a large number of new stewards would be needed, which is a challenge. 
Tatchell has attended 46 Pride marches and will march on Saturday. He said: In 1972 it was a carnival march for LGBT human rights. It was political and fun, without all the restrictions, costs and red tape that are strangling Pride today. 
Its time to put liberation back at the heart of Pride; to reclaim it as a political march with a party atmosphere. No limits on numbers and no motorised floats. This would dramatically cut costs and bureaucracy, and return Pride to its roots. 
A spokesman for the mayor of London said: The event is organised by Pride in London, not the GLA, and the mayor does not impose restrictions on the number of people involved in the parade or charge organisers."
"171""  A state government in eastern India says it will start employing transgender people and eunuchs as security guards in girls and women care homes after a spate of widely reported sexual assaults at the centres. An audit report of more than 100 safe houses in Bihar state in June accused the operators of a facility in Muzaffarpur city of systematically abusing girls being housed there.  Last week, a security guard was arrested in Chapra, a city north of the state capital, Patna, on suspicion of raping a girl at the centre where he worked.    Related: India: 17 men charged with raping 12-year-old girl over months    The incidents have sparked ongoing protests in the state and scrutiny of conditions inside the homes, where women and girls deemed vulnerable  including sex workers, sexual assault victims and trafficked women  are housed on remand or for rehabilitation and job training. The head of Bihars social welfare department told the Guardian the state would begin employing transgender people and eunuchs at the centres in response to the assaults. The recent incidents of rapes at short stay homes have shocked us, said the welfare department secretary, Atul Prasad. So we have planned to employ eunuchs as guards there. Eunuchs in south Asian societies fall under the category of hijras, a catch-all term for intersex people or those whose genitals do not fit the gender binary. Recently it has also come to include transgender men.  Hijras are celebrated in Hindu texts such as the Mahabharata and the Kama Sutra and also enjoyed influential positions in Mughal courts, including as guards of the emperors harem. An 1897 colonial law declared all eunuchs criminals, forcing them to the fringes, where some still make a living blessing weddings and babies. But many turn to prostitution and begging, sometimes threatening to curse those who do not pay with bad luck or infertility. Employing hijras as guards would be a win-win situation because they would pose less danger to the women, Prasad claimed, while also finding good jobs outside their traditional industries. While on the one hand, the eunuchs will get employment, on the other hand their deployment will strengthen security at short stay homes for girls, he said. The idea had won the approval of the Bihar state chief minister, Nitish Kumar, he said. Apart from providing us employment, the new job will also give us social recognition, said Anita Hijra, a transgender person from Patna who spoke to the Guardian after returning from blessing a newborn baby. This could be a small initiative but will bring huge change in the society in the long run. We are very happy. Reshama Prasad, a member of the states Eunuch Welfare Board, also praised the idea. Let aside employment generation, it will earn them a good social status, he said. Normally they are looked down upon by the society. Sexual assaults have become a growing concern in Bihar as consciousness about the issue increases and women groups become better recognised and more effective. A state government report found 428 rapes were reported this year to April, meaning at least three reports per day in the state. Around 1,100 rapes have been reported each year in the state the past five years. This is the second time in the past few years the Bihar government has turned to hijras for help. In 2006, it employed dozens of eunuchs and transgender people to collect outstanding municipal taxes in Patna.   "
"172""Feminist protesters have begun vandalising the new open-air street urinals in Paris, labelling them sexist and discriminatory. Several of the eco-friendly urinals have been placed in public spots in recent months as an experiment to counter Pariss problem of urine-soaked pavements. But protesters in recent days targeted two on the le Saint-Louis and near Gare de Lyon station  plastering them with stained sanitary towels and tampons, then blocking them with concrete. Notes left behind attacked Paris authorities for encouraging men to unzip and relieve themselves without cover in open public spaces  even though public breastfeeding still elicits scorn.    Un grand  aux fministes subversives pour cette action contre les &quot;uritrottoirs&quot; - Paris 23 aot 2018 pic.twitter.com/nC6G92pbJn&mdash; M.A.L.I (@MALImaroc) August 24, 2018    Police are investigating. No group has claimed responsibility, but the feminist protest group Femen denied involvement. Equality campaigners and women groups, along with local residents and parents, have complained that the open-air urinals are sexist and discriminatory. Without stalls or cover, the five experimental sites carry prominent signs showing a man proudly relieving himself in public. But no extra facilities are provided for women.     Uritrottoir on the banks of the Seine. Photograph: Thomas Samson/AFP/Getty Images    Feminists warned that authorities were sending the message that men owned the streets and could freely expose themselves in public  something at odds with debate in the wake of the #MeToo anti-harassment movement over how public spaces should allow women the right to feel at ease in the street. Gwendoline Coipeault of the feminist organisation Femmes Solidaires said: It is not just men who occupy the public space, but also women and children, who might not want to see men publicly urinate. These urinals are designed to comfort men and reinforce the idea that women arent welcome in the public space. It is discrimination and reinforces the stereotypical, sexist idea that men cant control themselves in any way, including their bladders. She added: I dont know a single women who regularly goes to Paris who hasnt witnessed a man urinating in public  openly on streets, in the metro  which reinforces a feeling of insecurity. Coipeault said there were already hundreds of closed public toilets in Paris and men should instead be encouraged to use them, as women did, rather than being invited to unzip outside. Chris Blache, a feminist and urban anthropologist, was not surprised by protests against the urinals. Frankly, these urinals are a provocation to women, she said. Its not about prudishness, its about gender equality in the public space. She warned that far from solving Pariss problem of street urination, the open-air urinals reinforced the notion that it was fine for men to expose themselves and urinate in public, while women were still criticised for breastfeeding outside. Blache, who has advised the Paris authorities on gender-equality in town planning, said she was not attacking the mayor, Anne Hidalgo, but rather the institutional sexism of technical teams who had not thought through the message they were sending. In recent days, some male commentators suggested women should simply use the open-air urinals standing up with the aid of a funnel. Blache dismissed this. If a women did that, it would be seen as a provocation and certainly not as the simple need to publicly relieve yourself after drinking too much beer, as it is seen for men. Police handed out 5,000 fines to people caught urinating against walls or on pavements in Paris in the first half of 2018  almost all men. But with 450 self-cleaning public toilets across the city, many open 24 hours a day, feminists said the extra public urinals specifically for men were sexist and unnecessary. Chlo Humpich from Paris city hall insisted the city was committed to gender equality. Paris would never promote a measure that discriminates against women ... We regret that these urinals have been damaged. We hear the criticisms and were conscious of taking women views into account."
"173""The government should force medium-sized companies to reveal their gender pay gaps and push for larger law firms to include partner pay, a group of MPs recommended on Wednesday. All companies with more than 50 employees should have to report their gender pay gap from 2020, said the business, energy and industrial strategy committee (BEIS). Currently only firms with more than 250 employees have to report their gender pay gap, leaving half of the UK workforce without knowledge of their workplaces gap.   Related: Gender pay gap costs global economy $160tn, says World Bank study    The committee said the government had to take fresh action to close the gap, and should force companies to publish action plans and narrative reports about what they were doing to narrow it. It also criticised the government for failing to clarify the legal sanctions available to the EHRC [Equalities and Human Rights Commission] to pursue those failing to comply and we recommend that the government rectifies this error at the next opportunity. The committees report states: The new reporting regime is a step forward, but its full potential has not yet been realised. We are calling for the government to be more ambitious. Rachel Reeves MP, chair of the BEIS committee, said its analysis of gender pay gap reporting, which saw companies report for the first time in April had found obscene and entirely unacceptable gender pay gaps of more than 40%. Acccording to figures lodged with the government for women median pay gap, the worst offenders included: Ryanair (71.8%), JP Morgan (54%), Capita Resourcing Limited (50.8%), Clarins (UK) Limited (49%), Merrill Lynch International (46.7%), EasyJet (45.5%), Sainsburys Bank (45.3%), Barclays Bank (43.5%) and Specsavers (41.9%). [See footnote] It is 48 years since the Equal Pay Act and the gender pay gap reporting requirement has shown that we still have a long way to go until women work is valued as much as mens, she said. Companies were failing to fully harness the talents of half of the population, with penalties for working part-time a major part of the issue, she said. Companies need to take a lead. For example, why arent they offering flexible working at senior levels? They must look at why they have a pay gap, and then determine the right initiatives, policies and practices to close it. Reeves said some companies decision not to include partner pay in their gender pay gap reports made a mockery of the system. She added that the committee had written to the magic circle of London-based major law firms about the issue, and only Allen &amp; Overy had refused to provide updated figures. The Government Equalities Office said it was publishing new guidance for companies to help them improve the recruitment and progression of women and close their gender pay gap. The minister for women and equalities, Penny Mordaunt, said the report set out some of the challenges and scale of the issue. It is appalling that, in the 21st century, there is still a big difference between the average earnings of men and women, she said.  We need to take action to ensure businesses know how they can make best use of their best talent and make their gender pay gaps a thing of the past. Sam Smethers, the chief executive of the Fawcett Society, welcomed the recommendation to include medium-sized companies.  We have to move on from simply reporting the pay gap, to taking action to close it, she said. Thats why we are glad that the committee agrees with Fawcett that companies should be required to publish and report on a plan, as well as providing data. Laura Hinton, chief people officer at PwC, who gave evidence to the committee said companies needed to move away from being viewed as a compliance issue to reporting that required action. Without robust action plans and greater accountability, we are unlikely to see the gender pay gap reduce significantly any time soon, she said. Creating an inclusive culture, where flexibility is embraced by all and leaders are responsible for setting a clear tone from the top, is the vital ingredient in driving action.  This article was amended on 2 August 2018. An earlier figure of 64% for the median pay gap at JP Morgan should have been 54%. A figure of 44.1% for British Gas actually referred to a 460-employee entity called British Gas Services (Commercial). According to data lodged with the government, the figure for the much larger British Gas Services is 37%; British Gas owner Centrica says that across its 29,000-employee group the median pay gap for women is 30.3%."
"174""Several years ago, Riko Miyauchis dream of becoming a doctor took her into the exam halls of one of Japans most prestigious medical schools. 
As a young women, she knew her prospects were slim. Tokyo Medical Universitys entrance exam was notoriously tough, with women far less likely to pass than men. 
Unknown to Miyauchi, the universitys authorities had put another barrier in her way. She is one of an unknown number of young women whose test scores the school deliberately marked down to prevent them entering a career in medicine and ensure more men became doctors. 
 
  Related: Tokyo medical school admits changing results to exclude women  
 
The Yomiuri newspaper reported last week how the university systematically kept the ratio of female students at just below a third, due to concerns about their ability to continue working after having children. 
The revelations have generated negative headlines around the world and prompted the education ministry to order an urgent investigation into suspected institutional sexism at dozens of medical schools. 
There were rumours that the school deliberately failed women so they could produce more male doctors, Miyauchi, one of the first affected women to speak publicly, said in an interview with the Guardian. But I was still shocked when I found out that those rumours were true. 
This week, the school admitted it had deliberately altered entrance exam scores for female candidates for more than a decade. 
The rigging of exam results was uncovered during an investigation into the alleged backdoor entry of an education ministry bureaucrats son in exchange for favourable treatment towards the school in obtaining research funds. 
The investigation found that in this years entrance exams the school reduced all applicants first-stage test scores by 20% and then added at least 20 points for male applicants, except those who had previously failed the test at least four times. 
 
  
  
  Protestors demonstrate against gender discrimination at Tokyo Medical University on 3 August. 
  Photograph: Aflo/REX/Shutterstock 
  
 
The scandal has received scathing media attention and prompted a public apology from the university, which acknowledged that the practice of altering candidates scores based on their gender started in 2006. 
Suspicions are growing that other medical schools also discriminate against female candidates. 
Sayumi Tanaka, who sat the Tokyo medical schools exam a few years ago, said she felt betrayed when she learned she was among those whose test scores had been manipulated. 
Changing peoples test scores because of their gender is straightforward discrimination, she told the Guardian. There is a huge difference between changing an exam score and giving someone a poor evaluation in an interview, because in the latter the examiner has more of a free hand. 
Tanaka, who is planning a career in psychiatry, is one of several women who are considering a compensation claim. I want them to return the money I spent on the entrance exam, she said. If I had known that the school discriminated against female candidates I would never have applied. 
The revelations have underlined the considerable obstacles facing Japanese women aspiring to become doctors. According to admissions records released by the school, the percentage of women who passed the entrance exam rose from 24% in 2009 to 38% in 2010, but the rate has fallen since then and stood at 18% this year. 
 
  Related: The future is female  how women are transforming face of the health service  
 
A similar story has unfolded nationwide. Although the number of female students in medical schools rose sharply between in the decade up to 1997, it has remained stuck at just over 30% for the past 20 years. 
The dearth of female doctors has left Japan trailing well behind other advanced economies. According to OECD data, in 2015 Japan had 67,493 female doctors, or just over 21% of the total - less than half the OECD average of almost 45%. 
I didnt have any concrete evidence, but something felt off, Kyoko Tanebe, an obstetrician and the director of the Japan Joint Association of Medical Professional Women, said of the rigged entrance exams. 
The root of the problem lay in the belief that male doctors are better placed to put in the long hours necessary to keep Japans pressurised healthcare system afloat, she told the Mainichi newspaper. Now that we have opened this Pandoras box, there needs to be a national discussion about what should be done on the floors of hospitals and other medical facilities. 
The scandal is an embarrassment to the prime minister, Shinzo Abe, who has made increasing the number of women in the workforce a pillar of his growth strategy. While women now account for more than 40% of the workforce, they are underrepresented in politics, company boardrooms and professions such as medicine. In 2017, the World Economic Forum ranked Japan 114th out of 144 countries in terms of gender equality, down 23 places from a decade ago. 
 
  Related: How can we make healthcare a better place for women to work? Live event  
 
Tanaka and Miyauchi, who had both accepted offers from other medical schools before their Tokyo exam results were compiled, hope the anger evident in social media and during a protest in front of the school last week will turn into a movement to force university authorities to change their ways. 
The medical school said it manipulated exam scores to ensure a steady supply of [male] doctors for its affiliated hospitals, said Tanaka. Their policy was not to support female doctors but simply to give more jobs to men. That isnt going to help solve the labour shortage in the medical profession. 
Miyauchi, who hopes to work in a hospital emergency room, said the test score scandal risked deterring girls from entering the medical and other professions. 
It reinforces the message that women dont need to bother studying, she said. The old-fashioned idea that women should raise children while their husbands go out to work still resonates in Japanese society. This is just an example of a much bigger problem. And its brought shame on Japan. 
Miyauchi and Tanakas names have been changed at their request."
"175""A young women who posted a shocking video of a man punching her outside a Paris cafe launched a website on Wednesday which allows victims of harassment to tell their stories. 
The site Nous Toutes Harcelement aims to collect accounts of incidents in the street, at work, in the private sphere Marie Laguerre, 22 , said. 
 
  Related: Uproar in France over video of women hit by harasser in Paris street  
 
Its anonymous, and that will allow these women to talk freely, she added. 
Laguerre, a student, wrote on Facebook last week that she was returning home when a man started making lewd comments. She told him to shut up and kept walking away, while the man went in the opposite direction. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
In surveillance video provided by the cafe, the man is then seen grabbing an ashtray from a table on the cafes patio and throwing it at her.  
He then returns and strikes Laguerre across the face. 
She filed a complaint with police and later posted the video, writing that we must no longer keep quiet. 
Since her video went up on Facebook, Laguerre has received messages from around the world from women sharing their own experiences as well as from men offering their support. 
Laguerre has done the rounds of French and international media retelling her story but now wants to capitalise on her new high-profile to deliver a message and improve things. 
Such harassment is a worldwide problem, she said. 
Laguerre contacted established women groups for advice, said Fatima Benomar, spokeswomen for one such organisation Les Effrontees.  
We considered things together and came up with the idea to create this site, she added. 
The messages from the online witnesses will also go up on Facebook. 
Similar online projects already exist, but Laguerre said it was important to her to start a new initiative to tackle the problem. 
Paris prosecutors have opened an inquiry following the posting of the video of the assault on her, according to legal sources. 
On Wednesday French lawmakers gave final passage to a bill that outlaws sex harassment on the street. 
The new law allows for fines of 90-750 euros ($105-$876) for gender-based harassment on streets and public transportation. 
It bans sexual or sexist comments and behaviour that is degrading, humiliating, intimidating hostile or offensive.  
It also expands the criminal definition of child rape and extends the statute of limitations for sex crimes. 
Junior minister for gender equality Marlene Schiappa said she is convinced the measure will act as a deterrent. 
Agence France-Presse and Associated Press contributed to this report"
"176""The most powerful emotions Lee Su-nam ever felt were on the afternoon of 25 July. He was sitting in his living room talking to his daughter who was visiting when his phone rang. The conversation lasted only a minute, but Lee discovered his older brother, long presumed dead, was alive and living in North Korea.   Related: Divided Korean families chosen for first family reunions in three years    The last time Lee saw his brother, Lee Jong-seong, was August 1950, a day he remembers for the heat and ripeness of the peaches on the trees. As the North Korean army approached Seoul, Lees parents decided to send their eldest son away for fear he would be conscripted into the communist militia if he remained. He was captured on the road and the family spent the next 68 years assuming he died in the 1950-53 Korean war. Since the beginning of the year, relations between North and South Korea have improved dramatically, and as part of that rapprochement, the two sides have organised reunions this week between long-separated families. The meetings are the first of their kind since 2015, but those participating have little knowledge of what to expect. Lee Su-nam has a single piece of paper confirming his brothers age, 86, and the fact he is alive. It also lists a wife and child, and the promising if hard-to-decipher comment that more extended family could also be living in the North. The first thing Im going to say to my brother is, thank you for being alive, Lee, 76, said as he spread ageing family photos on his kitchen table. But I also need to be careful, I know there are lots of things we cant talk about because of the politics in the North.     Lee Su-nam Photograph: Benjamin Haas    We have been separated for such a long time with no connection. Its going to take a while for the differences to melt away. South Korea is sending 93 people to Mount Kumgang, a tourist region in North Korea, after more than 132,000 South Koreans applied for the chance to see long lost relatives. The group from South Korea will meet their families between 20 and 22 August and North Koreans will meet their families in the South between 24 and 26 August. Of those who applied, North Koreas Red Cross could identify less than half, about 57,000, who were still alive. Lee will travel North with another of his brothers, but has no information as to what will happen once they arrive. Family reunions have been used as a first step towards building better relations between the two sides in the past, but as time passes, those who can remember their relatives are ageing and many have already died. There have been 20 reunions since 2000, with the last round held in October 2015 before relations between the two sides deteriorated. Im going to be happy and sad This reunion comes at a time when hope that diplomacy can force North Korea to make concessions on its nuclear program are fading. No one has rose-coloured glasses about unification, but for South Korea coexistence is important, says Vipin Narang, a politics professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. South Korea is much more comfortable living with a nuclear North Korea as long as there are positive exchanges, and official there have become more realistic about the potential outcomes as the US process has stalled. These may look like small goodwill gestures, but they are an important part of the trust-building process which North Korea has signalled it values, he adds. Lee spent his entire life living in the same neighbourhood. He went to the same secondary school as his missing brother and his surroundings are a constant reminder of the once happy family now scarred by war. But those memories are increasingly fading as a younger generation in South Korea focuses on economic growth and the fight for gender equality, rather than unification of the peninsula. The group of South Koreans travelling North includes a 101-year-old man and a 100-year-old women, and more than a third are over 90. This round of reunions may be the only time they can meet face to face, and Lee does not even know if they will be able to exchange letters in the future. Im going to be happy and sad at the same time when I see him, Lee said. Ill be sad because theres no guarantee that well see each other again. Additional reporting by Junho Lee"
"177""Kim Jeong-cheol wakes up every morning at 6am to deliver packages to Seouls wealthier residents, and spends every night ferrying those same people home after a night out, ending his working day well past midnight. He also works at a cosmetics distribution company he runs from his home with his wife.   Related: South Korea cuts 'inhumanely long' 68-hour working week    Kim is one of many in South Koreas capital to have taken on extra jobs as part of the unintended consequence of a law aimed at capping working hours and giving people more free time.  On 1 July South Korea cut the maximum weekly work hours to 52, down from 68. But the new regulation intended to combat long hours in Seouls steel and glass office towers has backfired for many doing manual or irregular labour, with people flocking to poorly regulated industries and facing pay cuts. Kim added his delivery job  for South Koreas national post  after the new law meant more office workers went home early, reducing the number of driving jobs at night. Kim, who has three daughters to support through university, now works about 19 hours a day. We used to be a happy family, I spent a lot of time with my daughters and when I had some free time I read the Bible, the 59-year-old said. Lawmakers are just passing new laws which only benefit the powerful and wealthy.     Kim Jeong-cheol from Seoul works about 19 hours a day now after a law meant to reduce working hours was enacted. Photograph: Benjamin Haas for the Guardian    Kim, whose income dropped 40% after the law came in, is not alone. A women who would give only her surname, Park, began working in a convenience store after she lost about 500,000 won ($445) a month due to the cap on working hours. A builder named Seo took a second job working as a type of unofficial bus service when hours were cut to comply with the law.  The National Assembly estimated that 150,000 labourers would face an average pay cut of 410,000 won a month when the law was passed due to working less overtime. About a third of South Koreas labour force works in jobs with irregular hours, such as construction, driving, cleaning or convenience store clerks, according to government statistics. Life with evenings In the 1960s, the nations economy expanded rapidly, turning a country still reeling from the 1950-53 Korean war into the 12th largest economy in a generation. It has produced national champions like Samsung, Hyundai and LG, massive conglomerates that wield significant political influence, but that achievement has come at the expense of leisure time. South Korean workers have some of the longest working weeks among members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, behind only Mexico. Last year the average person worked 2,024 hours, or about 38.9 hours a week. The group of mostly developed economies does not include countries such as China and India, and developing countries tend to work more. This gruelling work environment has been blamed for a host of societal problems, from a low birth rate to plummeting productivity. Chung Hyun-back, the family and gender equality minister, has called working hours inhumanely long and said they have contributed to the Souths rapidly ageing society. But South Koreans still work about 340 more hours a year compared with workers in the UK and Australia  about nine additional standard work weeks  despite having relatively similar average incomes. They work about six additional weeks compared with counterparts in the US.     Kim Jong-yong, a driver and labour organiser, says he has been banned by a taxi app for advocating for workers rights. Photograph: Benjamin Haas for the Guardian    There is a strong case for tackling the culture of long hours. Working more than 50 hours a week causes a drop in productivity, according to researchers at Stanford University, and there was little different in output for employees who worked between 56 and 70 hours. Despite hardships faced by workers paid by the hour, office workers have rejoiced at the new law. Some have long complained of a culture that expected employees to stay late despite a lack of work. Others say bosses would routinely assign extra tasks outside normal hours, leading many employees to procrastinate all day since they knew they had to stay late regardless of workload. Seouls city hall cuts electricity to the building at 7pm on Fridays and some private companies broadcast reminders throughout the week telling people to go home earlier. Retailers and bakeries have reduced opening times by an hour in some cases and more aggressive tactics include CCTV cameras monitoring offices for stragglers and limiting hours when employees can use swipecard systems. Employers who violate the law face up to two years in prison and hefty fines. Its very difficult to tell your boss or other people above you that youre going home earlier than them when theyre still in the office. I even had to tell them that I was sorry to leave if I had plans, says Jay Jung, 27, who works in hospital management. Beforehand, he typically did at least two to three hours of overtime a day. The so-called life with evenings is possible now because we can go home on time, he adds. A last resort But working-class people have largely mocked the new law for forcing them to take second or third jobs, saying: Instead of a life with dinner, theres a new life where you have to skip dinner. About 20,000 people have flocked to become on-demand chauffeurs since the new law passed, according to Kim Jong-yong, head of the Korean Association of Relief Drivers. Companies have lowered fares amid the influx of new workers, and Kim says he has been blocked by the largest app after advocating for workers rights. All the fanfare about the cap on working hours has left Kim wondering: Where are the legal protections for us? The 52-hour law was meant to benefit all workers, however its only positively affecting people working in stable, high-paying jobs such as civil servants and people working in corporate companies, he said. Taking a second job is the only thing keeping these people off the streets, its a last resort. Their struggles are a reflection of how Korean society treats and values working-class people. Additional reporting by Junho Lee"
"178""Gender discrimination in the workplace remains rife, with many young women experiencing sexual harassment, job insecurity and low pay compared with male peers, a survey has found. Almost a quarter (23%) of females aged between 16 and 30 have been sexually harassed at work but only 8% have reported it, according to the poll for the Young women Trust. Among the reasons for women not reporting workplace sexual harassment were fear of losing their job or being given fewer hours and not knowing how to make a complaint. The findings, contained in the trusts report, Its (still) a Rich Mans World, published 100 years on from the first women getting the vote, suggest illegal discrimination is commonplace throughout the employment process. Almost a third (31%) of young women reported sex discrimination while working or looking for work and one in five (19%) said they are paid less than their male colleagues for the same or similar employment. Additionally, 43% of young mothers said they had experienced maternity discrimination. The impact of gender discrimination is highlighted by the 52% of young women who said their work has had a negative impact on their mental health, compared with 42% of men. Dr Carole Easton, chief executive of the Young women Trust, said: Young women treatment at work, pay and wellbeing are trailing far behind those of young men. If 2018 is to be a turning point for women equality and not just a footnote in history, then its clear that we need deeds, not just words. We need to be impatient for change: a lot has been achieved in the last 100 years but theres still a long way to go. A concerted effort is needed from government and employers to provide young people with security and hope for the future, redress gender inequality at work and help manage the growing mental health crisis among young people. The charity says the Populus Data Solutions poll, of a representative sample of 4,010 18- to 30-year-olds in England and Wales, suggests that millions of women are losing out in the workplace despite the #MeToo movement and reforms such as gender pay gap reporting. Four in 10 young women (40%) said it was a real struggle to make their cash last to the end of the month, compared with 29% of young men. A greater percentage of young women compared with young men (39% to 32%) said they had been offered zero-hours contracts. If replicated in the wider population, the results would equate to 770,000 young women who would describe themselves as struggling financially, more than 800,000 who have been sexually harassed at work and not reported it, and more than a million who have been paid less than a man doing the same or similar work, says the trust. A Government Equalities Office spokesman said: This government is committed to tackling burning injustices, including closing the gender pay gap and sexual harassment in the workplace. Thats why we have introduced ground-breaking regulations requiring large employers to publish their pay gap data; universal credit to make sure that women and men who want to work get the flexible support they need to return to or enter work for the first time; and seen that more than 60% of people benefitting from our national living wage are women."
"179""We want to hear from people of any age who consider themselves to have been raised gender-neutral. Please share your experiences in the form below to help us find out more about gender neutrality. How to get in touch What aspects of your upbringing were gender-neutral? How do you think this impacted on your identity as an adult? You can share your thoughts and experiences in the form below. Your responses will only be seen by the Guardian, and one of our journalists may be in touch. We will consider some of your responses in our reporting. If youre having problems seeing the form, please click here. You can read terms of service here.     "
"180""Sandi Toksvig, the television presenter, has revealed she is paid less than half of Stephen Frys fee for chairing the BBCs quiz show QI. 
The performer, who also presents Channel 4s Great British Bake Off, was answering a question about her pay from one of the delegates at the women Equality party conference on Saturday in Kettering during a session on economics. 
Toksvig, who founded the party with Catherine Mayer in 2015, replied that she believes she is paid 40% of the fee paid to Fry, her predecessor, receiving a figure only equal to regular panellist Alan Davies. 
 
  Related: A year on, the BBC has still not done enough to close the gender pay gap | Jane Martinson  
 
Mayer said the revelation was greeted with a huge gasp from delegates. People just did not know, said Mayer. Sandi has always been clear that this is not about her pay, but she had to answer the question given that the issue of equal pay is at the centre of our partys policy. 
Toksvig said later that while she loved QI and its brilliant team who champion women, she had felt obliged to answer the question because the issues with equal pay and the gender pay gap cut right across the media and all industries and all areas of life. 
She added: Until now I had held back from talking about this because this is not about me. However, the lack of transparency around pay is a big part of the problem and I hope that being open, I can support women whose work is undervalued. 
 
 
  HUGE GASP in room at @WEP_UK conference as @sanditoksvig reveals she gets just 40% of what Stephen Fry got for hosting #QI and only the same as Alan Davies. #WE2018 pic.twitter.com/qtZAaDgMHY Catherine Mayer (@catherine_mayer) 
  September 8, 2018
  
 
In the past the British-Danish star told the Radio Times it would be absurd if she did not receive the same salary as Fry for hosting QI. But Toksvig has also argued her pay is not an issue. In an interview on BBC 5 Live in 2016, she said: I wasnt concerned about that because it is done through an agent and I am paid by an independent production company, and not the BBC, anyway. 
Toksvig added that only women get asked this question, because of the wider context of women generally being underpaid. She said she suspected Miles Jupp would not have been asked about his pay when he took over hosting BBC radios News Quiz, a job Toksvig did for nine years. 
Meanwhile, Mayer has revealed that she has settled an age and gender discrimination case against a former employer, Time Inc. 
Her lawsuit had pitted one of Britains most prominent journalists, who wrote a controversial biography of Prince Charles and was shortlisted for the Orwell prize, against one of Americas most famous magazines. This weekend, as she chaired the panel on inequality in the media, Mayer told the Observer she had reached an amicable resolution. 
Although she said she couldnt comment further on the case, Mayer added: I have never regretted taking action and would like to encourage others who feel they may be the victims of discrimination at least to take legal advice. My case encouraged others to come forward with their stories  We too often suffer in silence when, in fact, other women are going through the same things. 
Filed in a New York court last summer, and first reported by the Observer, Mayers lawsuit came at a time of intense focus on inequality in the media on both sides of the Atlantic. In Britain, the publication of BBC salaries unleashed outrage at both gender and race gaps in pay, while in the US, TV giant Fox News was reeling from a series of sexual harassment cases."
"181""The former prime minister Julia Gillard says gender bias played a role in the Liberal partys decision to ignore Julie Bishop in the first round of voting during last months leadership spill. 
But she also thinks there is cause for optimism that there is a public discussion about bullying and intimidation inside the Liberal party, with senior Coalition women leading the conversation.  
The fact such matters are being raised at all, and taken seriously when they are, is progress, Gillard said. 
 
  Related: Scott Morrison says Liberals will deal with bullying claims 'inside our team'  
 
And even when politics is not throwing up dramatic events like leadership spills, gender is part of the discourse. 
When I governed, the overwhelming mindset of the media was to dismiss out of hand any suggestion that anything happening to me was in any way related to gender. 
Gillard delivered a public lecture on Women and leadership at the University of Adelaide on Tuesday. 
She used the occasion to weigh in on the problems inside the Morrison government, with accusations bullying and intimidation took place inside Liberal ranks ahead of the leadership spill. 
She said there had been many reasons why the vast majority of Liberal MPs voted for Peter Dutton or Scott Morrison, but not Bishop, in the first round of their leadership ballot, but gender would have had something to do with it. 
 
  
  
  Julie Bishop arrives for a press conference on 27 August to announce she will sit on the backbench, despite speculation she could immediately leave parliament after losing the leadership spill. 
  Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP 
  
 
She said there would be votes motivated by how far to the right the Liberal party should sit on the political spectrum, or by policy concerns, or on the experience of the contenders. 
Equally, there would be votes motivated by internal conversations where contenders showed their capacity to unite colleagues, motivate a team, articulate a vision for the country. 
But I think one item that should appear on it is votes touched by bias, conscious or unconscious, about gender, she said. 
 
  Related: 'Unbelievable conflict': Julie Bishop says she was victim of Liberal factional feud  
 
What was the precise mix and the weighting of these kinds of factors in a Liberal members or senators head? We dont know and maybe the individuals involved couldnt even precisely articulate it themselves. 
She said there were optimistic trends in Australias national conversation, however.  
Now conversations about gender and leadership, including political leadership, are mainstream, she said. 
She said while attention was on gender and the conservative side of politics, there was one big lesson the Liberal party should learn from hard evidence. 
In 1994, the ALP and the Liberal party had around about the same percentage of women in their federal caucuses, she said. 
For Labor, it was 14.5% and for the Liberal party, it was 13.9%. Today, women are 46% of federal Labor, a jump of over 30 percentage points. In contrast, the Liberal party has inched forward to 23%, a jump of just over nine percentage points.  
In the years in between, it has been argued by Liberal party figures that mentoring and networking for women are the most effective strategies and that there is no need for targets or quotas.  
I think the easiest answer to that is scoreboard. Or maybe I could simply steal from Gough Whitlam the words: Its time.  
She laid out the problem facing those who are fighting for more female leaders. 
Globally, women make up just 23% of national parliamentarians, 26% of news media leaders, 27% of judges, 15% of corporate board members and 24% of senior managers worldwide, she said. 
If you believe as I do, that merit is equally distributed between the sexes, then any result that isnt around half and half should be troubling, she said. 
 
  Related: Q&amp;A: Julie Bishop would have been tougher PM for Labor, says Albanese  
 
She told the audience change was coming at a glacial pace. 
For example, the number of women in senior management globally has risen just one percentage point in 10 years, from 24% in 2007 to 25% today, she said. 
In politics, at the current rate of progress, it will take another half-century to reach parity with men.  
Equally concerning, when progress is made, it can also be reversed; women are now more underrepresented in the American cabinet than at any time since the Reagan administration."
"182""A doctor from Plano, Texas, has apologised for saying the gender pay gap in medicine is fair because female physicians do not work as hard and do not see as many patients as men.   Related: Golden State Warriors star Stephen Curry calls for closing of pay gap    Dr Gary Tiggess remarks were published by the Dallas Medical Journal, in a section entitled Big and Bright Ideas. Women did not work as hard as men, he said, because they choose to, or they simply dont want to be rushed, or they dont want to work the long hours. Most of the time, their priority is something else  family, social, whatever. He added: Nothing needs to be done about this unless female physicians actually want to work harder and put in the hours. If not, they should be paid less. That is fair. In the social media storm that followed, responses included a request to please tell him that hes just pissed off a few thousand HARD WORKING women physicians and: These kinds of views  are not supported by actual data. The gender pay gap is not fair. It is discrimination. According to the 2018 Medscape Physician Compensation Report, among primary care physicians in the US men earn 18% more than women, up from 16% more the year before. Male specialists earn 36% more than female specialists. The Medscape report also found that more female doctors, 22%, than male, 12%, work part-time. A 2017 study by JAMA Internal Medicine found that female doctors with children spend more time on parenting and domestic tasks than men. Medscape also said white US doctors of either sex earn more than their non-white counterparts. A report published in March 2018 by Doximity also found a widening gender pay gap. In 2017, it said, female doctors earned 27.7% less ($105,000) than their male counterparts, compared to 2016 when female doctors earned 26.5% ($91,284) less. The report also found no medical specialty  in which female physicians earned more than male physicians. In a statement posted to his practice website on Sunday, Tigges said: I have heard from several trusted female physician colleagues who disagree with and are deeply hurt and offended by the comments I made.   Related: What's your solution to fighting sexism and racism? Mine is: unions | Bhaskar Sunkara    I want to thank them for reaching out to me and sharing their concerns. I now understand more clearly how intricate this issue is and that there are ways we can work together to resolve these disparities. Tigges also said he had worked closely with numerous female physicians for nearly three decades and have witnessed nothing but compassion, diligence and professionalism. I sincerely apologize to all female physicians for my comments and the pain they have caused. The Washington Post reported that the Dallas Medical Journal said it published Tiggess thoughts because they represented a common perception that needed to be discussed, and would publish responses in its next issue. Dr Gabriela Zandomeni, chair of the committee that publishes the journal, said: The danger is in the physicians who think this but do not express it, or who justify it."
"183""The New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has pledged to put all the things left to achieve gender equality at the top of my list as the country marked 125 years since it became the first in the world to give women the vote. In a speech in Aucklands Aotea Square the prime minister honoured the tens of thousands of women who, in 1893, signed a suffragists petition to demonstrate the breadth of support for their cause.   Related: Jacinda Ardern to guest edit New Zealand newspaper on anniversary of suffrage    I believe within the ordinary stands the extraordinary and its thanks to these women that I am here today, she said. I choose to honour them by putting all the things left to achieve gender equality at the top of my list. Despite opposition, the legislation allowing women to vote was passed by both houses of parliament that same year and became law on 19 September. Ardern also guest-edited a special edition of the New Zealand Herald and dedicated a large section to women in business and sport. She also wrote a personal essay dedicated to those behind the 1893 suffrage movement, including her relative, Kate Wiltshire.    Tonight Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern joins the New Zealand Herald editorial team as the guest editor of the 125th Suffrage edition #Suffrage125 #NZHSuffrage pic.twitter.com/jpcMhYKSMB&mdash; nzherald (@nzherald) September 18, 2018    We have a history we can be proud of in Aotearoa, Ardern wrote. Every family will have a tale of a pioneering women, a whine toa. But these women also exist today and their strength is manifest in our daily lives. Its to them we owe progress. Lifting wages, closing the gender pay gap, living free from violence, having the choice to be a carer, to have a career, be a mother  those are uppermost on my to-do list. Our extraordinary women deserve no less. Timed to coincide with the anniversary, a bill introduced to parliament on Wednesday will also make it easier for workers in female-dominated professions to claim fair pay. Acting minister for women Eugenie Sage said the bill was one piece of the puzzle in closing the gender pay gap. Discrimination has led to lower pay for many female-dominated industries, despite having similar working conditions and skill requirements to comparable male-dominated occupations, she said.   s front page on Wednesday, guest edited by New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern.\" width=\"800\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  NZ Heralds front page on Wednesday, guest edited by New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern. Photograph: NZ Herald    A number of special projects commemorating the event have also been launched, including the Herald featuring 125 profiles of women across New Zealand history, and noted.co.nz will showcase an interactive homage to the words of movement leader Kate Sheppard. AM Show host Amanda Gillies said while much had changed since 1893, the country was still behind in the push for equality. We have to continue the fight for equal rights, for equal pay, for a place on the board and to be the CEO, she said. We still arent on the same page as men, theres still a belief for many that at the end of the day its a mans world. A recent report had placed NZ 33rd out of 35 countries for women in leadership, on boards and in senior management roles. The country had a female prime minister and governor general, but Gillies said that needed to be the rule and not the exception. We need to continue to speak out, we need our voices to be heard all the time. New Zealand is home to amazing, strong, powerful women leaders who can make change, just look at what Kate Sheppard did."
"184""A major police academy in Thailand has announced it will ban women from enrolling , sparking accusations of gender discrimination. The Royal Police Cadet Academy (RPCA), on the western outskirts of Bangkok, accepts about 300 applicants a year. But from 2019 it will admit only men. Worawut Sripakhon, an RPCA captain, did not offer a reason for the new rule, saying: Its policy. Were not allowed to give any more information than that. Jadet Chaowilai, director of the rights group Women and Men Progressive Movement, said admitting fewer women to Thailands 230,000-strong police force could have grave consequences for female assault victims. Under Thai law female rape victims must be interviewed by female officers, but according to UN Women 90% of rapes in the country go unreported. This is a very backward move for women rights and women safety in Thailand, Chaowilai told the Thomson Reuters Foundation. Victims may be embarrassed or reluctant to speak to male officers. Women worked only in office and support roles in Thailands police force until 2009, when they were allowed to train as officers for the first time. Since then about 700 females have graduated as officers from the RPCA, which is more than 100 years old. Usa Lerdsrisuntad, director of rights group Foundation for Women, said the ban was gender discrimination. There are already too few female police officers, and now this rule will further reduce those numbers. Women will be able to become police officers via other Thai academies following the RPCA ban, but the move has been widely seen as the latest in a pattern of sexist police recruitment rulings.  This year the Royal Thai Police Office (RTPO) announced plans to let only men apply for official roles, attempting to justify the decision by suggesting that family duties caused women to quit these jobs. Rights groups accused the RTPO of breaching Thailands Gender Equality Act."
"185""The head of the International Monetary Fund has said it should be politically incorrect for companies not to have a women in a senior position. Christine Lagarde said even companies with no moral compass should recognise they can boost their profits through promoting women to senior and boardroom positions. We need to make it politically incorrect not to have women on boards, not to have women CEOs, not to have women in the boardroom, she said. In a speech in London, Lagarde said tackling gender inequality would boost economic growth in developing nations, as she urged businesses worldwide to appoint more women to senior posts.  Lagarde said increasing the proportion of women in prominent business and finance industry jobs could raise economic dynamism and shift firms into thinking about the long-term future of the planet. Warning that greater effort was required to meet the sustainable development goals (SDGs) set by the United Nations, which includes ending all forms of gender discrimination, Lagarde used a speech in London to say: By bringing more women into the fold, the economy can benefit from their talents, skills, unique perspectives and ideas. This diversity should boost productivity and lead to higher wages for all.   Related: Sustainable development goals: changing the world in 17 steps  interactive    In a stark example of the challenge to meet the SDG on gender equality, set by the UN in 2015 to achieve by the end of the next decade, Lagarde said about 90% of countries around the world had some legal restriction on women economic activity. The sad reality is that girls and women all over the world continue to face the daily indignities of discrimination, harassment, and too often violence as well, she said. Lowering gender gaps in health and education, supporting financial inclusion, investing in infrastructure and ensuring better access to clean water and sanitation for women would, however, help create a virtuous cycle for the world economy. Invest in the SDGs and boost women empowerment, which in turn lays the groundwork for broader SDG success, she said. Outlining the importance for developing nations, she said reducing gender inequality by 10 percentage points in sub-Saharan African countries could boost growth by two percentage points over five years. Alongside eradicating gender discrimination against women and girls everywhere, the goals for global development set by the UN include reducing the proportion of people living in poverty by at least half, improving access to education, tackling climate change and ending world hunger by 2030."
"186""The popular Distracted Boyfriend meme, based on a photo of a man turning away from his outraged girlfriend to stare admiringly at another women, has been ruled sexist by Swedens advertising ombudsman. The stock image, also known as Man Looking at Other women, by Antonio Guillem, a photographer from Barcelona, was named meme of the year in April and was one of the most widely shared memes in 2017, providing comment on anything from music to politics to hit TV shows.   Related: I didn't know what a meme was, says Distracted Boyfriend photographer    The ombudsman said recruitment advertisements posted on Facebook by the internet services provider Bahnhof, which labelled the boyfriend You, the girlfriend Your current workplace, and the second women Bahnhof, were gender-discriminatory, the Local reported. The advertisement objectifies women, the ombudsman, RO, said. It presents women as interchangeable items and suggests only their appearance is interesting  It also shows degrading stereotypical gender roles of both men and women and gives the impression men can change female partners as they change jobs. The ombudsman said the image objectified the two women by presenting them as workplaces, but the man as an individual, and added that the other women was clearly a sex object ... unrelated to the advertisement, which is for recruiting salespeople, operating engineers and a web designer. The Swedish advertising industry is self-regulating, meaning that the ombudsman can criticise ads but it does not have the power to impose sanctions. The ad, posted in April, drew nearly 1,000 comments, many from women who complained it was sexist. 1. You really dont want to attract women to your company, one commenter, Susanne Lahti Hagbard, said. 2. You really dont want to attract sensible guys either. Another, Sofie Sundker, said: It doesnt matter if its a popular meme. If you do not see how this picture is sexist whatever words are on the people, you are clearly not a workplace for any women who wants to be taken seriously in her work. The company said on its Facebook page that its aim had been to illustrate a situation that shows Bahnhof is an attractive employer, and that people who have a slightly duller workplace might be interested in us. This was the situation illustrated in this meme. Anyone familiar with the internet and meme culture knows how this meme is used and interpreted. Gender is usually irrelevant in the context. We explained meme culture to the ombudsman, but it chose to interpret the post differently. If the company should be punished for anything, it concluded, it should be for using a tired old meme. While it frequently features near the top of world gender-equality rankings, a 2016 study found Sweden was the worst of the Nordic countries at combating sexist advertising. This year, Stockholm council voted to bar ads deemed sexist or degrading from the citys public billboards."
"187""Its great you can name the Dolce and Gabbana models (G1, page 9, 24 September), but why not the demonstrator on your front page? After all, hes been in your photos before. His name is Steve Bray and he is well known and respected among remainers. He protests outside the Commons when it is in session and has done so every day since the referendum.Ellie SedgwickWesthall, Suffolk  I wonder if there isnt a smidgen of gender-stereotyping in Hadley Freemans tale of a male tutor in her university years (Weekend, 22 September). I was a female student in the late 1960s and at that time some of us used, scornfully, to call the sort of tutors actions she describes as trying it on, some of us showed off our supposed sexual liberation, and more than one of us, dear reader, married him. Isnt the gender/power scene more complex and more complicated than it seems to be here?SF MelroseDeal, Kent  Ivan Volodin, the Russian charg daffaires, says: Russia is always happy to welcome international guests if they arrive in a lawful manner and with good intentions (Letters, 25 September). Im guessing theres no word in Russian for irony.Alan CleaverWhitehaven, Cumbria   Your Seven ways to overcome loneliness (G2, 24 September) was useful, but havent you missed one out? Meeting friends in the pub for a drink!David RainbirdWallasey, Merseyside  I realise that a lot of letters originate from readers west of the Pennines and that some subscribers on the east side might feel resentful. But two letters on the same day from the same Yorkshireman (Letters, 25 September) is surely over-compensation.Peter BettsLiverpool   Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters  Do you have a photo youd like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and well publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition"
"188""South Koreas fertility rate is expected to fall to an all-time low this year, setting the country up for a host of problems including underfunded pensions, expanding debt and economic decline. The average number of babies born per women of reproductive age is due to be as low as 0.96 this year, falling below one for the first time in history, according to a study commissioned by the Chosun Ilbo newspaper. Such a low fertility rate is normally only seen during wartime, said Lee Chul-hee, an economics professor at Seoul National University and one of the authors of the study. Theres definitely going to be a psychological shock among the Korean people, he said. It will likely influence what is considered to be an ideal number of children, and could lead to the rate dropping even further. Lee Chul-hee warned that social welfare schemes such as healthcare and pensions will face shortfalls as society ages and there are fewer people to pay to support them. Classrooms could also empty out as fewer children attend schools, and the South Korean military, where all men are conscripted to face the threat of North Korea, could lack adequate troop numbers. It is a trend facing wealthy nations around the world, but one that has manifested particularly quickly in South Korea. The global fertility rate is expected to be two births per women by 2100, just below replacement levels, according to UN projections. South Koreas birth rate has been dropping since the 1960s. Following a baby boom after the 1950-53 Korean war, the government launched a campaign encouraging women to have no more than two children.   Related: Photojournalist Kim Hong-Ji explores South Korea's 'baby boxes'    The status of women in South Korea, a deeply patriarchal society, is a major driver of the trend, along with worsening job prospects for young people and rising property prices. Women are getting married and having children later in life, if at all, for fear of being denied promotions and facing discrimination at work. The average age for South Korean women marrying for the first time is 30.2, according to figures from the ministry of gender equality and family, up from 24.8 in 1990. On average, women have their first child at 31.6. When the figure was released in March, a researcher at the official body Statistics Korea said: If a women has her first child when she is 32, it becomes difficult to have more than two children. The government has tried to reverse the trend with little success. Authorities spent 153tn won (106bn) between 2006 and 2018, according to figures from the national assembly, on measures designed to encourage more births. Those efforts include free childcare until the age of five, cash payouts to pregnant women and supporting youth clubs. Lee Bong-joo of Seoul National University said: This is approaching disaster levels. Focusing only on childcare wont be effective in the future; increasing gender equality in the home and the workplace is the best solution, but that will take time. He suggested government housing subsidies for young couples, aggressively tackling the gender discrimination faced by new mothers and removing the stigma associated with single-parent households. But even those measures may not be enough. The total number of babies born last year was 357,000, down from 493,000 a decade ago, and even if fertility rates begin to rise, it will be among a shrinking pool of women. Lee Chul-hee said: The speed in the decline of children born each year is more important than the fertility rate  that will produce real problems in economy and society."
"189""In medieval English folklore, the lord of misrule was an anarchic, half-crazed clown who presided over an annual Feast of Fools. This week the UN security council, that most august and sober of international bodies, looks set to revive the tradition with its own riotous diplomatic banquet. In the chair and wielding the gavel for the first time: none other than Donald Trump, 45th US president, former reality TV host, and modern-day lord of misrule. Trump will be in New York for the annual UN general assembly of world leaders. Some 84 heads of state, 44 heads of government and senior ministers from the UNs 193 sovereign states are due to attend. Like other presidents and premiers, Trump will address the assembly on Tuesday. Last year he stole the show when he tore up protocol, threatened to totally destroy North Korea, and mocked its leader, Kim Jong-un, as Rocket Man on a suicide mission  before performing a dizzying U-turn this year. Although the UN gathering will discuss a range of worthy subjects, including poverty and climate change, drug trafficking and gender equality, all eyes will inevitably be on Trumps antics. The White House has already indicated that his main target on Tuesday will be Iran. Trump will accuse Tehran, in trademark confrontational terms, of supporting terrorism, lying about nuclear weapons, and fomenting regional instability. But it is the unprecedented spectacle of Trump chairing a security council session, scheduled for the following day, that could attract most attention. Since he apparently believes he is the No 1 world leader, here is his chance to prove it. Iran will again top the agenda  because the country whose turn it is to chair the council, in this case the US, chooses what it debates. Trump is expected to try to browbeat members into backing swingeing new US sanctions on Tehran. And thats when the trouble could start. All the other permanent members of the council  China, Russia, the UK and France  have deplored Trumps decision to withdraw from the UN-endorsed, multilateral nuclear pact with Iran. The EU and others are working to minimise the impact of sanctions. They all believe it is better to engage with Iran rather than ostracise it, and despite denials, they all suspect Trumps ultimate aim is regime change. US officials, fearing a major embarrassment, have already broadened the councils agenda to encompass nuclear proliferation in general. But if Trump resorts to the disrespectful language, blatant untruths and bullying that have come to characterise his presidency, he may provoke a powerful backlash. Far from supporting his claim to global leadership, the ensuing row could starkly dramatise American isolation. And that would hand a victory to Iran. It is even possible that Hassan Rouhani, Irans president, who is attending the general assembly, could come to the security council to defend his country. That is unlikely, but Rouhani is not one to duck a fight. At last years assembly he roundly denounced Trump as a rogue newcomer peddling ignorant, absurd and hateful rhetoric. It was Americas president, not Iran, who threatened world peace, he said. Trumps performance this week will raise bigger questions about his administrations negative approach to multilateralism and international law, and his rocky relationship with the UN itself. Speaking to the American media outlet Politico last week, a senior German diplomat said preserving the Iran nuclear deal had become a question of principle, concerning the need to maintain international norms, treaties and agreements. Reflecting these worries, Antnio Guterres, the UN secretary general, called on Thursday for renewed commitment to a rules-based global order. Speaking against a backdrop of criticism of the UNs failure to halt the Syria conflict, scandals over sexual harassment and gender inequality, and funding problems, a defensive-sounding Guterres warned that multilateralism is under attack from many different directions precisely when we need it most. The UN, he declared, was still the worlds indispensable forum for international cooperation. Trumps willingness to exploit the UN platform for his own ends, while simultaneously denigrating and undermining it, contrasts unhappily with the historical US approach to an organisation Franklin Roosevelt was instrumental in creating in 1945. Under Trump, the US has withdrawn from the UNs human rights council and Unesco, its education and cultural agency; cut funding for peacekeeping operations, the UN population fund and Palestinian relief agency; and boycotted the UNs Paris climate change accord, the Iran deal, and the global migration pact. Earlier this month, John Bolton, Trumps national security adviser, set out plans to destroy the UN-mandated International Criminal Court, the criminal justice systems global flagship for prosecuting genocide and war crimes. Trump, meanwhile, continues his predecessors practice of failing to fully pay Americas UN dues. Although the US remains the biggest contributor, its budget arrears are estimated at $1.3bn. Trumps contemptuous treatment of the UN sets a demoralising example for less powerful countries that value it for the voice it gives them in world affairs. It is also exacerbating a negative trend among leaders of the great powers: a tendency to bypass an often deadlocked UN over the big geopolitical questions of the day (such as Iraq and Syria). The leaders of China, Russia and India will not be in New York this week. While Trump acts out and plays the fool, they will be busy taking responsibility for global leadership off Americas hands."
"190""Spains health minister, Carmen Montn, has resigned after becoming the latest senior politician to find her educational qualifications under scrutiny. Montn stepped down on Tuesday night following a series of reports detailing irregularities in her masters degree in interdisciplinary gender studies, which was awarded by King Juan Carlos University in Madrid seven years ago. She insisted she had been transparent and honest, but an investigation by the online newspaper El Diario found discrepancies over her attendance and the marks awarded. Moreover, it emerged on Tuesday that Montn had plagiarised passages from Wikipedia and other websites in her final degree work. The MP claimed she had done nothing wrong and, in an apparent reference to the opposition Peoples party (PP) politicians who have faced questions over their degrees, said: Were not all the same. She paid tribute to Pedro Snchez, the Socialist prime minister who appointed her after being sworn in three months ago, as she left office. Spanish men and women have a fantastic prime minister and Ive informed him of my resignation so that this situation doesnt get in the way, Montn said. Earlier that day, Snchez had given the minister his backing. Shes doing a great job and will carry on doing so, he said. The prime minister later tweeted his thanks: In your 100 days at the helm of the health ministry, you have restored universal healthcare in our country and youve worked tirelessly to return and increase rights. Thanks, Carmen Montn, for your commitment to equality and social justice. Your brave decision does you credit.    En 100 das al frente de @sanidadgob has recuperado la sanidad universal en nuestro pas, has trabajado sin descanso para devolver y ampliar derechos. Gracias, @carmenmonton, por tu compromiso con la igualdad y la justicia social. Tu decisin, valiente, te honra.&mdash; Pedro Snchez (@sanchezcastejon) September 11, 2018    Montn is the second minister Snchez has lost since he used a vote of no confidence to unseat his PP predecessor, Mariano Rajoy, amid public anger over the partys corruption and cronyism. In June, the culture minister, Mxim Huerta, resigned following media reports that he had avoided paying taxes while working as a TV journalist 10 years ago. Pablo Casado, the new PP leader, has also faced questions over his academic record. Earlier this year, it emerged the postgraduate degree he claims to hold from Harvard had in fact been earned by attending a four-day course in Madrid. He has also admitted he was awarded a masters degree in public regional law by King Juan Carlos University despite not being required to attend classes or take exams. Spains supreme court is looking into Casados degree and will decide whether the investigations should continue. However, PP sources maintain that Casados case is very different from that of Montn, arguing their leader has not been accused of plagiarism or falsification. In April, Cristina Cifuentes, the PP head of Madrids regional government, resigned after video footage emerged of her apparently being caught stealing two tubs of face cream seven years ago. Cifuentes had also been under pressure to quit over allegations of irregularities in her masters degree from King Juan Carlos University."
"191""The 2019 European elections will be dominated by identity politics, according to the German politician who became the first to throw his hat into the ring to become the next president of the European commission. Manfred Weber, the leader of the centre-right European Peoples party in the European parliament, fired the starting gun on the EUs race for top jobs as he announced his hopes of succeeding Jean-Claude Juncker. Launching his campaign, Weber said Europe was at a turning point, with its values being challenged from internal and external forces. Weber, a Christian Democrat who lives in a small village in socially conservative Bavaria, has previously described Christianity as the soul of Europe and his EPP called for a ban on wearing the full-face veil in public. Identity will be one of the dominant issues for the campaign, said Weber, speaking to a group of European newspapers in his first interview since declaring his candidacy. There is a European way of life, a European identity, he said. Asked to defined Europes way of life he focused on secular values, listing democracy, the rule of law, the social market economy, gender equality, press freedom and separation of church and state. With Europes traditional parties facing a challenge from anti-EU rightwingers, including the Alternative fr Deutschland and the Front National, Weber said the 2019 elections would be a historical decision for the future of this continent. It will not be anymore a side event. But he faces numerous obstacles in his path to the top job. An MEP for 14 years, who is unknown outside Brussels, Weber would be the first commission president since Jacques Delors not to have served as leader of an EU country. He has never served as a government minister. He hopes to win the nomination of the European Peoples party at its congress in mid-November. In 2014 an agreement between the EPP and the Socialists, the two largest groups, to run lead candidates (spitzenkandidaten) for the commission presidency, propelled Juncker to the top. The new commission president will take over from Juncker in autumn 2019, following elections in May. Traditionally, the commission president has been chosen by EU leaders, but in 2014 they were outmanoeuvred by the European parliaments spitzenkandidaten process and reluctantly accepted Juncker. It is far from certain EU leaders would accept this parliamentary fait accompli twice, especially if the centre-right and centre-left lose seats. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, hopes to create a Europe-wide version of his centrist La Rpublique en Marche party, adding to uncertainty about the outcome. Merkels dislike of the spitzenkandidaten system seemed evident in her lukewarm endorsement for her political ally. She noted there were many steps before Weber could become the next European commission president. To win the EPP nomination, Weber may face competition from Michel Barnier, the EUs chief Brexit negotiator, who lost to Juncker in 2014, or Alexander Stubb, a former prime minister of Finland. Neither has declared if they will run. While Weber portrays himself as a values candidate, it is not clear how he would broker compromises on thorny issues that have divided the EU, such as migration. He would be very sensitive to countries opposed to accepting refugees and migrants, such as Hungary and Poland. Asked about the EUs long-stalled migration reforms, he said: They dont want to have a Molenbeek area like we have here in Brussels in Budapest, Warsaw or wherever, he said, referring to the Brussels neighbourhood that has been stereotyped as a haven for extremists, after it emerged the plotters of the Paris attacks had lived there. Webers claim to represent European values will face a test next Wednesday, when the European parliament votes on whether Hungary is in breach of democratic values. Weber has been accused of protecting the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbn, but he insisted it was better to keep Hungary in the group. The starting point of Brexit was the decision of David Cameron to leave the EPP group  I dont want to see the same happening with the east of Europe."
"192""He has mocked women as idiots and as tramps, as unworthy of rape, let alone equal pay. Within weeks he could be crowned president of a country that is home to 108 million of them. 
But with Brazils highly polarized 7 October election looming, huge numbers of Brazilian women are now mobilizing to derail the presidential bid of the far-right frontrunner Jair Bolsonaro, who is leading polls with about 26% of intended votes. 
We need everyone to pull together to stop this disaster happening to our country, said Mara Motta, a 40-year-old philosophy teacher from the city of Vitria da Conquista. 
 
  
  
  Jair Bolsonaro, who is recovering from a stabbing attack but leads in the polls. 
  Photograph: Evaristo Sa/AFP/Getty Images 
  
 
Motta is one of more than 2.5 million women who have in recent days joined a Facebook campaign to stop Bolsonaro in his tracks. Ludimilla Teixeira, a 36-year-old advertising executive, said she had founded the group  Mulheres Unidas Contra Bolsonaro or Women United Against Bolsonaro  on 30 August as a platform to coordinate protests against politicians with misogynist, prejudiced and truly fascist ideas. Within 24 hours it had accumulated 600,000 members. 
Bolsonaros son Eduardo falsely dismissed the group as fake news being peddled by the Guardian, and after suffering repeated attacks by hackers, the groups administrators turned it into a secret group on Sunday. 
Teixeira, from the north-eastern city of Salvador, called herself a tiny spark that had set off a powder keg of indignation across Brazil. We thought it would grow but never that it would be so fast. 
Motta and Teixeira said members hailed from all corners of the country and all walks of life: elderly women, lawyers, housewives, trans women, doctors, authors and civil servants. They were united by a collective dread that a man with such toxic views on women and minorities might become their leader. 
It is terrifying to think we might have a president who doesnt care about gender equality, who supports the idea that women should be paid less than men, said Teixeira. 
 
  
  
   
    Biography
    
    Born in Glicrio in So Paulo in 1955 to parents of Italian descent, he served in the army from 1971 until 1988, when he was elected as a city councillor in Rio de Janeiro for the Christian Democratic party. In 1990, he became a federal congressman for the same party. He has since been affiliated with a number of political parties. On 22 July, he was officially nominated as the presidential candidate of the Social Liberal party.
    
    Policies
    
    Bolsonaro espouses populist and nationalist views that often stray into far-right territory.&nbsp; A vocal opponent of same-sex marriage, abortion, immigration and other progressive causes, he has defended the death penalty and the 1964-85 military dictatorship. On foreign policy, he has said he wants to improve relations with the US. Economically he says he is pro free market and privatisation.&nbsp;
    
    Political style
    
    Deliberately provocative and polarising. He has praised Gen Pinochet, expressed support for torturers and called for political opponents to be shot, earning him&nbsp;the&nbsp;label&nbsp;of \"the most misogynistic, hateful elected official in the democratic world.&nbsp; In his bid to capitalise on Latin Americas lurch to the right, he paints himself as a tropical Donald Trump: a pro-gun, anti-establishment crusader set on \"draining the swamp\" and cracking down on violent crime.
    
    Controversies
    
    On top of repeated calls for a return to dictatorship, he has made equally inflammatory attacks on&nbsp;women,&nbsp;black people,&nbsp;gay people, foreigners and indigenous communities. Earlier this year,&nbsp;he was charged by the attorney general with inciting hate speech.&nbsp;
    
    Support and first round victory
    
    Bolsonaro has a devout following among some conservative voters, who admire his promises to get tough on rampant violent crime, and won 46% of the vote in the election's first round.&nbsp;
    
   
  
  
 
We are not against Jair Bolsonaro the human being  We vehemently repudiate the attack he suffered, she added. But we cannot allow someone with such highly anti-democratic positions on women rights to reach the highest job in Brazil. 
 
  Related: 'He's not perfect': why do so many Brazilians support rightwinger Jair Bolsonaro?  
 
Teixeira said she was particularly worried about Bolsonaros apparent desire to make abortion laws even more draconian, but warned the poisonous views of a politician notorious for making racist and homophobic statements were not just a menace to women. She said: We are his main target but we are not the only ones. Many other communities are having their rights threatened. 
Although Bolsonaro, a former army officer, has been confined to hospital since he was stabbed during a rally earlier this month, polling suggests he is holding on to a firm lead over his nearest rivals, the Workers partys Fernando Haddad and centre-leftist Ciro Gomes. 
But Bolsonaros unpopularity among female voters presents a serious challenge to his presidential aspirations. Women represent 52% of Brazils 147 million-strong electorate and polls show 49% oppose his candidacy compared with just 37% of men. 
Hes the candidate who has the biggest discrepancy between his male vote and his female vote in the history of Brazil, said Jos Roberto de Toledo, a political journalist from the magazine Piau, who said that in some states Bolsonaro has 75% less support among women than among men. 
Bolsonaro is not totally without female support: polls show 17% of female voters back him  less than the 32% of men, but a significant number nevertheless. 
 
 o Paulo.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
  
  Jair Bolsonaro is not without female supporters, such as these women in So Paulo. 
  Photograph: Nacho Doce/Reuters 
  
 
Female fans post photos on an Instagram account called Bolsolindas (Bolsobeauties) and have a Facebook page of their own, Mulheres Com Bolsonaro (Women With Bolsonaro), with more than 30,000 followers. 
I love him, said Katarina Abreu, a 59-year-old retiree who was among dozens of Bolsonaro supporters gathered at a recent beachside campaign event in the north-eastern city of Recife. 
 
  Related: Trump of the tropics: the 'dangerous' candidate leading Brazil's presidential race  
 
Asked about Bolsonaros controversial statements on women, Abreu replied: Everyone is a little bit [sexist], arent they? Theres no point in lying. 
Cassya Marques, a 32-year-old advertising student at the same rally, rejected claims her candidate was a misogynist. 
Hes never said that he doesnt care about women, that women are worth less  he never said that, she insisted as she waved a white flag reading: Presidente Bolsonaro. 
Hes a God-fearing, family man  hes a guy with a good heart and thats what matters."
"193"" 
  11.41pm BST  
  
  For full coverage of the developments at the UN general assembly today go to our wrap of events: 
   
    Related: Trump urges world to reject globalism in UN speech that draws mocking laughter  
   
  
 
 
  9.29pm BST  
 Summary 
  
  The speeches are still ticking along  Paraguay is at the podium right now and 15 other countries are in line  but as the evening approaches in New York, heres a look at where things stand:  
   
   Irans president, Hassan Rouhani, was critical of Trump through the duration of his speech, at one point criticizing leaders who: ride public sentiments and gain popular support through the fomenting of extremist nationalism and racism and through what he called xenophobic tendencies resembling a Nazi disposition. 
   Frances president, Emmanuel Macron, declared his opposition to protectionist, isolationist policies and advocated for policies that combat inequality. I think that were seeing a crisis of the very foundations of todays world, Macron said. Were losing our benchmarks and our modes of functioning. 
   Macron also said countries should stop signing trade agreements with those who dont comply with the Paris agreement. 
   Trump was more measured than last year, when he threatened to totally destroy North Korea, but his remarks still challenged the USs traditional at the UN, with the president sharing a manifesto for nativism.  
   His speech emphasized US sovereignty. And said the US will We are only going to give foreign aid to those who respect us, who frankly are our friends. It also got the only laughs of the morning from the general assembly, when he said his administration had accomplished more than any other in less than two years. 
   At a luncheon following his speech, Trump said: When I first came here, even though I lived in New York, it was a little bit of a foreign territory to me, the United Nations. But now its like home. 
   UN secretary general, Antnio Guterres, opened his speech by warning that the world is suffering from trust deficit disorder. 
   
  
 
 
  8.56pm BST  
  
  The Guardians world affairs editor, Julian Borger, writes from UN headquarters in New York on the open derision Trump faced in the general assembly hall.  
  While most leaders have used their time on the UN stage to list the agreements they have made, the protocols agreed and treaties signed, Trump clearly delighted in telling the world how many such pieces of paper he had ripped up. 
  The lead writer of the speech was reportedly Stephen Miller, now the primary bridge between the White House and the American far right. It showed. The address was a manifesto for nativism. 
  Any remaining pretense of altruism was stripped away from this vision of US foreign policy, and in its place was a strong tinge of resentment and self-pity. 
  Trump observed that the US was the worlds biggest aid donor, but few give anything to us. 
  Moving forward, we are only going to give foreign aid to those who respect us and, frankly, are our friends, he warned. 
   
   
    Related: Donald Trump's manifesto for nativism at the United Nations  
   
  
 
 
  8.36pm BST  
  
  The AP has a report on Iranian president Hassan Rouhanis remarks at the general debate this morning.  
   
   Rouhani accused the Trump administration of violating state obligations from the Obama administration by withdrawing from the 2015 nuclear deal that Iran signed with the US and five other major powers.  
   On what basis and criteria can we enter into an agreement with an administration misbehaving such as this? Rouhani asked. It is ironic that the US government does not even conceal its plan for overthrowing the same government it invites to talks. 
   In remarks released while Rouhani was still talking, National Security Adviser John Bolton doubled down on the decision to withdraw from the deal, echoing his presidents strong language and using blunt language to dismiss any entreaties from Tehran. He called the scrapped Iran deal the worst diplomatic debacle in American history.  
   According to the mullahs in Tehran, we are the Great Satan, lord of the underworld, master of the raging inferno, Bolton said in remarks prepared for delivery at a New York meeting convened to oppose Irans nuclear ambitions.  
   So, I might imagine they would take me seriously when I assure them today: If you cross us, our allies, or our partners; if you harm our citizens; if you continue to lie, cheat, and deceive, yes, there will indeed be HELL to PAY, Bolton said.  
   The capitalizations were included in the text of the quotes released to journalists.  
   Rouhani, in his general assembly remarks, laid into leaders who believe they can ride public sentiments and gain popular support through the fomenting of extremist nationalism and racism and through what he called xenophobic tendencies resembling a Nazi disposition.  
   
  
 
 
  8.26pm BST  
  
  The morning session of the general debate has adjourned.  
  And the afternoon session has begun after a break that lasted a couple minutes.  
   
   s president Hassan Rouhani addresses the United Nations general assembly in New York\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Irans president Hassan Rouhani addresses the United Nations general assembly in New York 
    Photograph: Shannon Stapleton/Reuters 
    
   
  
 
 
  7.55pm BST  
  
  Donald Trump also spoke at a luncheon hosted by the UN secretary general today, where he said the United Nations was like home to him.  
   
   I think were an example  certain things were doing now toward world peace. Were truly a direct  has a direct relationship to the time I spent at the United Nations, meeting some of you. Many of you are now friends. 
   When I first came here, even though I lived in New York, it was a little bit of a foreign territory to me, the United Nations. But now its like home. But so many great people, so many great leaders in this room. And a lot of terrific things are happening. 
   We covered, as you know, during my speech, North Korea. Last year, my tone was somewhat different on North Korea than it is right now. Tremendous progress has been made. And I think youre going to see an outcome. As the expression goes, Who knows? But I think youre going to see a very, very great outcome. 
   I hope that, eventually, some of the other countries that we have conflict with  if not war-like conflict, trade conflict, other types of conflict  a lot of those problems will disappear, I think, by next year. 
   
  
 
 
  7.29pm BST  
  
  Rouhani says the most pressing crisis in the Middle East is the Israel-Palestine conflict.  
  He then emphasizes Iran is not interested in war with any country.  
  Iran does not need an empire. Iran is an empire in terms of its civilization and culture, not political domination.  
  He goes on to explain Irans history of combatting terrorism.  
  Rouhani ends his speech: The world will not have a better friend than Iran, if peace is what you seek.  
  
 
 
  7.21pm BST  
  
  Rouhani continues: unlawful, unilateral sanctions in themselves constitute a form of economic terrorism.  
  He says the US policy with Iran has been wrong from the beginning.  
  No state and nation can be brought to the negotiation table by force and if so what follows is the accumulation of the grapes of wrath ... to be reaped later by the oppressors.  
  If you dislike the JCPOA [Iran nuclear agreement] because it is the legacy of your domestic political rivals, then you are invited back to the negotiation table, says Rouhani.  
  For dialogue to take place, there is no need for a photo opportunity, Rouhani says, explaining that he is starting a dialogue at that moment from the UN podium. 
  Our proposal is clear, commitment for commitment. Violation for violation. Threat for threat. And step for step. Instead of talk for talk.  
  
 
 
  7.13pm BST  
 Rouhani: challenging multilateralism is 'symptom of weakness of intellect' 
  
  Irans president, Hassan Rouhani, says his remarks come as the world is suffering from recklessness and disregard of some states for international values and institutions  
  Rouhani doesnt use Donald Trumps name, but seems to be taking a direct hit at Trumps administration and says its policies resemble a Nazi disposition 
  He said the illusion must end that security and peace are possible by denying those things to others.  
  Confronting multilateralism is not a sign of strength, rather it is a symptom of a weakness of intellect, Rouhani says.  
  For those doubting that these comments were directed at Trump, Rouhani has moved on to talk about the Iran nuclear agreement and the USs exit from it.  
  We are pleased that the international community did not acquiesce to the USs illegal and unilateral withdrawal from that agreement.  
  
 Updated at 7.20pm BST 
 
 
  7.03pm BST  
  
  Qatars emir, Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, is speaking about the Syrian conflict. 
  We are facing a humanitarian, moral and legal catastrophe, he says.  
  He also reaffirmed Qatars support for Yemens independence and for the conflict to end. He appealed for help from the international community to address the grave humanitarian situation. 
  Qatar is prioritizing the fight against terrorism, he said. To end the war on terrorism, he said standards for fighting terrorism need to be unified and its roots and causes need to be addressed. 
  
 
 
  6.49pm BST  
 Summary 
  
  The are still seven countries to go in the morning session of the general debate, including Irans president Hassan Rouhani. 
  Well continue providing updates, but here is a look at where things are so far: 
   
   UN secretary general, Antnio Guterres, opened his speech by warning that the world is suffering from trust deficit disorder. His speech  which touched on climate change, migration and gender equality  seemed to be a veiled hit at Donald Trump, whose isolationist policies contradict the work of the United Nations.  
   Trump ran late, ceding his second speaker slot to Ecuador. His remarks were more measured than last year, when he threatened to totally destroy North Korea, but he still presented a very different version of the USs role in the global order.  
   His speech emphasized US sovereignty. And said the US will We are only going to give foreign aid to those who respect us, who frankly are our friends. It also got the only laughs of the morning from the general assembly, when he said his administration had accomplished more than any other in less than two years. 
   Trump was preceded by Brazils president, Michel Temer, who warned in his final speech to the general assembly: old forms of intolerance are being rekindled. 
   Frances president, Emmanuel Macron, declared his opposition to protectionist, isolationist policies and advocated for policies that combat inequality. I think that were seeing a crisis of the very foundations of todays world, Macron said. Were losing our benchmarks and our modes of functioning. 
   
   
    Related: Trump urges world to reject globalism in UN speech that draws mocking laughter  
   
  
 
 
  6.45pm BST  
  
  Jordans king, Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, begins by saying too many people are victims of inequality and that global terror is the third world war.  
  All our countries benefit when we unite in common cause, he says.  
  He is advocating a two state solution for the Israel-Palestine conflict. We cannot give up because the task is hard, because what is the alternative? 
  He also spoke about the refugee crisis, which has disproportionately impacted Jordan, where 89 of every 1,000 residents are refugees.  
  He said it could not be addressed without help from major countries.  
  
 
 
  6.40pm BST  
  
  Emmanuel Macrons speech to the UN was a pointed rebuke to Donald Trumps worldview in several areas  protectionism, globalism  but the French presidents comments on climate change stood out, writes Guardian environment reporter, Oliver Milman.  
  Macron said countries should stop signing trade agreements with those who dont comply with the Paris agreement. Given the US is the only nation on the planet to say it wants to exit the landmark climate pact, it is quite clear where Macron is aiming this jab. 
  Some environment groups have called for the US to be shunned if it leaves the global effort to avoid dangerous climate change and Macrons comments will likely lead to pressure on other governments to isolate America in areas like trade to spur it to rejoin the international community. 
  Last year, Trump announced the US would withdraw from the Paris agreement, which commits nations to avoid breaching a global temperature rise of 2C. Due to notice periods, however, the US wont actually leave the deal until 2020. 
  
 
 
  6.33pm BST  
  
  Perus president, Martin Vizcarra Cornejo, makes his first address to the general assembly - six months after he took office. 
  Vizcarra Cornejo speaks about Perus support of the UNs anti-corruption measures. 
  We will promote determined action by the general assembly for all states to fight corruption, he says. 
  He said Peru also supports efforts to combat climate change. We all have the moral obligation to protect our planet for future generations.  
  
 
 
  6.27pm BST  
  
   The decline in Turkish-US relatons was laid bare today when the Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoan launched a strong assault on President Donald Trumps rhetoric of force and unilateralism, writes the Guardians diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour. 
  Speaking immediately after Trumps call for patriotism, Erdoan warned the world will not be able to survive the arbitrary use of sanctions. 
  Erdoan had met Trump briefly ahead of his speech  the first meeting since the two leaders fell out over Turkeys detention of the US pastor Andrew Brunson.Trump had personally interevened to seek his release, but has been rebuffed, leading to US sanctions.Erdogan said None of us can remain silent to the arbitrary cancellation ofcommercial agreements and the use of economic sanctions as weapons, adding that we are in favor of solving our problems through conducting a constructive dialogue on equal terms. Erdogan criticised countries that use the rhetoric of threat, force and which disregard the history of bilateral relations. We must all work together to prevent damage to the world trade regime, he said 
  Erdoans remarks underline the deepening tensions with the US, pushing Turkey, a Nato member, closer to Russia, and in the Middle East to Qatar. 
  
 
 
  6.17pm BST  
  
  Seychelles president, Danny Faure, is speaking extensively about climate change.  
  He says his island see the stark realities of climate change every day. 
  The Seychelles supports the African Unions call for a review and reform of the security council, he says.  
  Our nation was formed by the ocean, Faure says. We are acutely aware of the threat it poses with climate change.  
   
    Related: Climate change to drive migration from island homes sooner than thought  
   
  
 
 
  6.03pm BST  
  
  Macron has spoken for three times as long as the UNs advised, but not enforced, 15 minute speech limit.  
  All of this happens because we turn our heads and remain complacent, Macron says.  
  My county has made a lot of mistakes, but it is a country that at every turn in its history ... has thought of universality, Macron says.  
  Dont accept our history unraveling, he says.  
  
 
 
  5.59pm BST  
  
  The White House has published Donald Trumps full remarks to the United Nations here.  
   
   Americas policy of principled realism means we will not be held hostage to old dogmas, discredited ideologies, and so-called experts who have been proven wrong over the years, time and time again. This is true not only in matters of peace, but in matters of prosperity. 
   We believe that trade must be fair and reciprocal. The United States will not be taken advantage of any longer. 
   
  
 
 
  5.48pm BST  
  
  Think about the gaps in GDP, Macron says. If we want to create stability and balance, this state of inequality must be addressed. 
  Macron says combatting inequality is the priority of the French presidency.  
  It is here, from this podium, that I wanted to share with you that tackling inequalities will be at the heart of the G7s mission, he says.  
  We must attack inequalities of fate if you like, he says. It is not acceptable anymore that an individual would have lesser opportunity because of where they are born, or their gender.  
  
 
 
  5.39pm BST  
  
  Macron says we must take action on climate, demographic and technological challenges. 
  He says he doesnt believe in complete openness when it comes to migration, but also doesnt believe in closing borders. He says the only way to create an effective solution for the modern migration crisis is to address the root causes of migration and dismantling trafficking networks.  
  He issues support for the global migration compact, which every members state except the US and Hungary are a part of.  
  Friends, I deeply believe in the sovereignty of people, Macron says.  
  In the 21st century, we should only triumph through bolstered multilateralism, he says.  
  My point is: I dont believe in generalized or empty globalization. I dont think this can be a reality. But I believe in universal values. Thats what should guide us. Those are two different things.  
  Now for the obligatory Trump reference. Macron says: Even in the face of certain nationalism, which we are seeing today, brandishing sovereignty as a way of attacking others. Here today, even those who might criticize it, we have all benefited from the way global order is structured around globalization.  
  He says rising nationalism is happening because the underlying issues of inequality havent been addressed.  
   
    
    
    French president Emmanuel Macron addresses the 73rd session of the United Nations General Assembly 
    Photograph: Mary Altaffer/AP 
    
   
  
 
 
  5.29pm BST  
  
  Macron is zeroing in on areas where he sees protectionism and isolationism creating problems.  
  What can resolve the crisis between Israel and Palestine? Surely, not unilateral initiatives, Macron says.  
  We should all stand ready to go beyond our historical positions, to think out of the box, with the real goal of this leading to positive change on the ground.  
  Macron says the law of the strongest will only exacerbate conflict and violence. 
  He says a new balance must be struck on three principles: 
   
   upholding sovereignty 
   enhancing regional cooperation 
   providing more robust international safeguards 
   
  
 
 
  5.24pm BST  
 Macron: the foundations of today's world in crisis 
  
  Frances president, Emmanuel Macron, is at the podium.  
  Everyone here today inherits hope, he begins.  
  Its time to take a fresh look at todays world, Macron says.  
  This world order failed in regulating itself, economic, financial, environmental and climatic issues remain pending to date, Macron says. It failed because our collective ability to tackle these crisis is far too often hampered by divisions on the security council.  
  He says the UN could be a symbol of powerlessness, and world leaders must stop this from happening.  
  I think that were seeing a crisis of the very foundations of todays world. Were losing our benchmarks and our modes of functioning. This is not a historical parenthesis.  
  He says unilateralism is the source of the issues.  
  
 
 
  5.15pm BST  
  
  Mexicos president, Enrique Pea Nieto, is up. His presidential term ends in November.  
  Nieto says democracy is strengthening in Mexico, but concedes: We recognize that our country is still facing major challenges for human rights.  
  Nieto says he is concerned that the world is reversing trends and heading back to systems such as isolationism and protectionism that he believed were in the past.  
  Nieto mentions repeatedly his support for nuclear disarmament. At the same time, we reiterate the call for compliance with security council resolutions for the complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, he says.  
  He ends by bidding goodbye to the security council for good.  
  This organization is our best evidence that is worth fighting for a more peaceful, safe world, Nieto says. 
  
 
 
  4.59pm BST  
  
  Rwandas president, Paul Kagame, speaks about the relationship between the African Union and United Nations.  
  The theme for this years general debate is making the United Nations relevant to all people, Kagame says.  
  But he says the two track system of making decisions does not account for every countries needs. 
  If you get the ones to define the norms by which others should be judged, but standards that do not apply to everyone equally are not universal, Kagame says.  
  He said international institutions will have renewed legitimacy if this is adjusted.  
  
 
 
  4.45pm BST  
  
  Erdoan talks about Turkey being one of the top global providers of humanitarian aid.  
  He also speaks about how Turkey is home to 2.6 million refugees.  
  Our world needs global leadership and joint responsibility more than ever, he says.  
  He calls on countries to commit to more sincere plans to help resolve conflicts across the US. And warns that safety inside a countrys borders is not possible without working to peace and stability for all.  
  Erdoan demands extradition of terrorists, specifically the man he claims is behind the attempted military coup on his government in 2016: Fethullah Glen.  
  Glen is in self-exile in Pennslyvania.  
  I invite you to mobilize your efforts to fight Fethullahs presence in your country, Erdoan says.  
   
    Related: Fethullah Glen: alleged coup mastermind  and friendly neighbor  
   
  Erdoan is now condemning isolationism.  
  
 
 
  4.31pm BST  
  
  There was a notable absence in Trumps speech: Russia.  
   
   
    Trump at the UN. Good places: India, Saudi Arabia and Poland.Not Good places: Iran, friends of Iran, Nicaragua, Germany, China, OPEC countries, Syria, countries that don't respect America. Places not spoken about: Russia. Patrick Wintour (@patrickwintour) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
   
   
    For a president and national security advisor who keep touting sovereignty, there was a notable absence of Russia from the #UNGA speech. (Georgia and Ukraine might have something to say about how Russia views sovereignty) Robbie Gramer (@RobbieGramer) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 4.31pm BST 
 
 
  4.28pm BST  
  
  Turkeys president, Recep Tayyip Erdoan, is on stage.  
  Trump might be gone, but Erdoan quickly makes a veiled comment directed at the US president, criticizing governments that ignore the suffering of Palestinians and have withdrawn aid to help them. The US said it would end funding to the UNs program for Palestinian refugees earlier this month.  
  These countries, he says, are only increasing the courage of the oppressors.  
  
 
 
  4.14pm BST  
  
  Given Trumps attack on global governance and cooperation, and the US withdrawal from key United Nations programs, his speech takes an unexpected turn as he praises the diversity at the United Nations.  
  He calls the UN a beautiful constellation of nations.  
  Trump says: There is the heart of a patriot that feels the same powerful love for your nation. The same intense loyalty to your homeland. The passion that burns in the hearts of patriots and the souls of nations has inspired reform and revolution. 
  He continues: To unleash this incredible potential in our people, we must defend the foundations that make it possible. 
  We must protect our soveirngty and our cherished independence above all. When we do, we will find new avenues for cooperation unfolding before us. We will find new passion for peacemaking rising within us. We will find new purpose, new resolve.  
  Let us come here to this place, to stand for our people and their nations. Forever strong, forever sovereign, forever just and forever grateful for the grace and goodness of God.  
  He ends: God bless the nations of the world.  
   
    
    
    Trump at the lectern. 
    Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP/Getty Images 
    
   
  
 Updated at 4.24pm BST 
 
 
  4.09pm BST  
 Trump: US will only give foreign aid to 'friends' 
  
  Trump says the US is the bigger provider of foreign aid, but its not fair because the US doesnt get money back.  
  He announces that US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, will be reviewing its foreign aid contributions.  
  We are only going to give foreign aid to those who respect us, who frankly are our friends, Trump says.  
   
   
    Trump now using #UNGA speech to say that U.S. will only give foreign aid to \"our friends\" who \"respect us.\" Pompeo to lead. Luckily, Congress will have a big say in this process. Both Republicans and Democrats have previously said that this sort of thing is a non-starter. Rob Berschinski (@RobBerschinski) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  4.07pm BST  
  
  Trump is back to migration.  
  He says the US respects other countrys migration policies and expects them to do the same.  
  He reaffirms that the US will no longer participate in the United Nations migration pact.  
   
    Related: Donald Trump pulls US out of UN global compact on migration  
   
  Currently we are witnessing a human tragedy, as an example, in Venezuela, says Trump.  
  Trump attacks Venezuelas president Nicols Maduro by calling for an end to socialism.  
  
 Updated at 4.21pm BST 
 
 
  4.03pm BST  
  
  Trumps tone is measured, but his comments still mark a dramatic departure from the USs traditional role at the United Nations.  
   
   
    Trump at #UNGA \"America is governed by Americans. We reject the ideology of globalism and we embrace the doctrine of patriotism.\" Julian Borger (@julianborger) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
   
   
    In what may have been the entire portion of Trump's #unga speech detailing the strategy underlying current U.S. foreign policy, Trump labeled it \"principled realism.\" He didn't really define the term, other than saying that it's the opposite of \"experts,\" who get things wrong. Rob Berschinski (@RobBerschinski) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
   
   
    That sucking sound you hear is the last bits of US soft power evaporating through the ceilings of the UN General Assembly. Mark Leon Goldberg (@MarkLGoldberg) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  4.01pm BST  
 Trump: 'America is governed by Americans' 
  
  Now Trump is condemning the UN human rights council for shielding human rights abusers while criticizing the US.  
  The US quit the human rights council in June.  
   
    Related: US quits UN human rights council  'a cesspool of political bias'  
   
  America is governed by Americans, Trump says.  
  He attacked the International Criminal Court (ICC) and now the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC).  
  He gets another laugh, for saying OPEC is taking advantage of the US and I dont like it.  
   
    
    
    Trump said Opec was taking advantage of the US. 
    Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images 
    
   
  
 Updated at 4.05pm BST 
 
 
  3.57pm BST  
  
  The US will not be taken advantage of any longer, Trump says, taking aim at China.  
  Trumps tone is unusually measured but another bump comes as he talks about foreign products sold in the US, before going back down to talk about trade deficits.  
  We will not allow our workers to be victimized, Trump says. 
  
 
 
  3.55pm BST  
  
  For those who missed the general assembly laughing after Trump touted his administrations successes in his opening remarks, heres the video:  
   
    
    
     
    
    
   
  
 Updated at 5.01pm BST 
 
 
  3.53pm BST  
  
  Trumps tone is picking up slightly as he speaks about Iran, which he says has a bloody agenda.  
  Trump says Irans leaders do not respect their neighbors or borders or the sovereign rights of nations.  
  And he accuses Irans leaders of plundering resources for their own gain.  
  He condemns the horrible 2015 nuclear deal and calls on other countries to completely isolate Iran.  
  
 
 
  3.50pm BST  
  
  Now on to the Middle East.  
  Trump touts successes in stopping the bloodthirsty killers of Isis.  
  He says the US will respond if Syria uses chemical weapons.  
  He then thanks Jordan and other neighboring countries for housing refugees, a point to back his interest in keeping refugees out of the US.  
   
    Related: 'People will die': Obama official's warning as Trump slashes refugee numbers  
   
  
 
 
  3.46pm BST  
 Trump thanks Kim Jong-un 
  
  Trump touts US engagement with North Korea, a country which he threatened to totally destroy in this forum last year.  
  He says nuclear testing has stopped, hostages have been released, and missiles are no longer flying across North Koreas border with South Korea.  
  He then thanks North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, for his courage and the steps he has taken.  
  He then offers gratitude to the presidents of South Korea, Japan and China.  
  
 
 
  3.43pm BST  
  
  US president Donald Trump has arrived.  
  Today I stand before the United Nations general assembly to share the extraordinary progress we made, he says.  
  He says his administration has accomplished in less than two years more than any other administration.  
  Theres a slight rumbling in the hall, then he pauses to say its true, resulting in the first big laugh of the day from the foreign dignitaries.  
  Trump is measured, and says the US will always choose independence over global governance.  
  The United States will not tell you how to live, work and worship, Trump says. We only ask that you honor our sovereignty in return.  
   
    
    
    Trump arrives with Melania, and Nikki Haley, the US ambassador to the UN. 
    Photograph: Stephanie Keith/Getty Images 
    
   
  
 Updated at 4.26pm BST 
 
 
  3.37pm BST  
  
  Donald Trump has been busy at the UN general assembly ahead of his remarks today.  
  Yesterday, the US president announced he would hold a second summit with the very open and terrific North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un. 
  Those compliments are a remarkable turnaround from Trumps first appearance at the UN general assembly last year, when he hurled insults at Kim and threatened to totally destroy North Korea. 
  Heres a look at what led to the change of course and the reaction to the planned second summit: 
   
    Related: Trump plans new Kim summit a year after threat to destroy North Korea  
   
  
 
 
  3.36pm BST  
  
  Back to Ecuadors Lenin Moreno Garcs, who has called on the US to end its blockade on Cuba.  
  He is also speaking extensively about migration, saying that people flee because they have no choice.  
  His country has seen more than 547,000 Venezuelans enter since January to escape rampant crime and political violence, a collapsing economy and severe shortages of food and medicines. 
  We know that world peace is a duty that remains pending, Moreno Garcs said.  
  There wont be any peace unless we preserve our planet, he says.  
  There wont be peace unless we celebrate inclusion.  
  
 
 
  3.28pm BST  
  
  Donald Trump is in the building. Senior White House advisor, Stephen Miller, is by his side.  
   
   
    Trump says Despite requests, I have no plans to meet Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, at #unga. Maybe someday in the future. I am sure he is an absolutely lovely man! Maybe well have a chance to ask @realDonaldTrump today whether he was joking about the last bit. Anne Rumsey Gearan (@agearan) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
   
   
    \"Iran has to change its tune before I meet with them,\" President Trump said upon entering the United Nations ahead of UNGA speech Aaron Katersky (@AaronKatersky) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
  
 
 
  3.26pm BST  
  
  Moreno Garcs explains his countries operating plan called whole life. 
  This starts by taking care of mothers and children, improving education and job prospects and supporting adults, he says. 
  He speaks about his childhood in the Amazon and how he and his peers would envision ways they could climb out of poverty.  
  And then about being shot twenty years ago, and how even that painful incident was not entirely good and not entirely bad.  
  From this wheelchair, I see through the eyes of the heart, he says.  
  Moreno Garcs says seeing horizontally gives him a closer eye to people who are discriminated against.  
  He calls for improved accessibility for people with disabilities, one of the seven priorities for this general assembly and improving treatment of other groups that are discriminated against.  
  
 
 
  3.17pm BST  
  
  Ecuadors president, Lenin Moreno Garcs, is at the podium.  
  This slot was meant for Donald Trump, but he appears to be running late. So, Garcs has been bumped up in the schedule. 
  Fun fact:  
   
   
    Trump not the first president to miss his speaking slot at the UN. Obama was late during his last speech in 2016 so they moved on to the president of Chad Kevin Liptak (@Kevinliptakcnn) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 3.18pm BST 
 
 
  3.07pm BST  
  
  Temer warns about issues with human trafficking, drug trafficking and other forms of transnational crime.  
  That can only be effectively tackled through concerted policies and actions, Temer says. 
  Temer acknowledges this is the last time he will be speaking in the general assembly because the countrys presidential election is in two weeks.  
  An alternation in power is the very essence of democracy, Temer says.  
  I will hand over the presidency to my successor with the peace of mind of having fulfilled my duty, he says.  
  He says Brazil is a much better country than it was before he took office.  
  And ends by saying Brazil will always be a country that supports more dialogue, more international solidarity and multilateralism.  
  
 
 
  3.00pm BST  
  
  Temer is speaking about the global migration crisis.  
  It is our duty to protect them and this is the purpose of the global compact on migration, he says.  
  He highlights mass migration in South America, where people are fleeing Venezuela at such a high rate the UN has warned it could be comparable to the Mediterranean refugee crisis.  
   
    Related: Venezuela heading for 'crisis moment' comparable to refugees in Mediterranean, UN says  
   
  
 
 
  2.54pm BST  
  
  The Guardians world affairs editor, Julian Borger, writes from the United Nations on Donald Trumps latest tweet.  
  In the early morning message, Trump made a personal rapprochement to Hassan Rouhani, saying he was sure that the Iranian president was an absolutely lovely man. 
  A few minutes before 7am on the first day of a UN general assembly summit, Trump claimed to have been asked to meet Rouhani, but politely declined. 
  Despite requests, I have no plans to meet Iranian President Hassan Rouhani. Maybe someday in the future. I am sure he is an absolutely lovely man! Trump wrote, in stark contrast to unceasingly hostile rhetoric directed towards the Iranian leadership up to now by the president and his administration. 
  The Iranian mission to the UN quickly issued a statement insisting Iran has not requested a meeting. 
   
    Related: Trump flatters Rouhani: 'I'm sure he is an absolutely lovely man'  
   
  
 Updated at 3.36pm BST 
 
 
  2.52pm BST  
 Temer: 'Old forms of intolerance being rekindled' 
  
  Brazils embattled president, Michael Temer, begins by asking how many people have been in this forum and called for an improved global order.  
  He continues to say it is an important question to ask as: the challenge is to the integrity of the current international order are many.  
  Temer says isolationsim is on the rise and old forms of intolerance are being rekindled.  
  Meanwhile, he says, Brazil is not being isolationist, touting all the countries its government has been working with.  
   
    
    
    Temer speaks before the crowd. 
    Photograph: Jason Szenes/EPA 
    
   
  
 Updated at 3.47pm BST 
 
 
  2.43pm BST  
  
  Some early reaction to Guterress speech:  
   
   
    Im gonna guess Guterres speech - like that of any good UNSYG - would be a giant troll of Trump, intended or not Michael Fuchs (@mikehfuchs) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
   
   
    UN Sec Gen's speech, like the speech he delivered last year, offered a devastating broadside against the Trump vision of world affairs -- and without effort mentioning Trump by name columlynch (@columlynch) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
   
   
    While Trump prepares for his UN speech focusing on US sovereignty, the SG warns of a \"trust deficit disorder.\" Guterres says there's a lack of trust in the rules based global order. \"Multilateralismis under fire precisely when we need it most. Michele Kelemen (@michelekelemen) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
  And a deep cut for the international relations nerds:  
   
   
    IR Nerds: The UN Secretary General just cited both Thucydides and Harvard's Graham Alison. Mark Leon Goldberg (@MarkLGoldberg) 
    September 25, 2018
    
   
  
 Updated at 2.44pm BST 
 
 
  2.38pm BST  
 President says first priority is gender equality 
  
  The president of the general assembly, Mara Fernanda Espinosa Garcs, is on stage to welcome the crowd. 
  She says this is the only assembly that allows world leaders to hear and be heard on equal footing.  
  We live in an interconnected world leaving us no choice to pursue a global dialogue, she says.  
  She says the first priority of this general assembly is gender equality.  
   
   The second: new global agreement on migrants and refugees.  
   Third: improving employment.  
   Fourth: climate change and improving environmental protections.  
   Fifth: political and social commitment to helping people with disabilities.  
   Sixth: the revitalization of the United Nations. 
   Seventh: peace and security and the role of young people in conflict prevention. Sustained peace must be rooted in dialogue and understanding, she says.  
   
  Conflict is resolved through conversation and understanding, she says.  
   
    
    
    General assembly Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces, center. 
    Photograph: Xinhua/Barcroft Images 
    
   
  
 Updated at 3.43pm BST 
 
 
  2.28pm BST  
  
  The speech is veering back to optimism after a bleak rundown of the worlds major conflicts and instability of democratic institutions.  
  Guterres is speaking about cooperation between countries that have historically been at odds, including improved relations on the Korean peninsula.  
  Again, he speaks extensively about the importance of improving gender equality.  
  Guterres quotes former UN secretary general Kofi Annan: We share a common destiny, we can master it only if we face it together, and that my friends is why we have the United Nations.  
  
 
 
  2.24pm BST  
  
  Now for technology.  
  Guterres says that rapid technological advances have benefits but also have introduced challenges.  
  The very nature of work will change, he warns, claiming that the impact of technology on the labor market will require countries to increase public benefits and underlines the need for a universal basic income.  
  He says further challenges include how technology is being used by terrorists and for sexual exploitation.  
  He says technology is exploiting the gender gap and reinforces male power structures.  
  He says the impact of new technologies on warfare are a direct threat on the common goal to guarantee peace.  
  The prospect of machines with the discretion and power to take human life is morally repugnant, he says.  
  
 
 
  2.19pm BST  
  
  Guterres highlights the plight of refugees, warning that countries who close their borders to migrants only fuel the work to traffickers.  
  He is speaking extensively about climate change and the immense threat it poses to the world. Climate change is moving faster than we are.  
  We must listen to the worlds best scientists, he says.  
  Guterres proposes investing in green businesses.  
  He announces a climate change meeting for next September that will look at the environment and finance. It is timed for a year ahead of the deadline for countries to revise their pledges in the Paris climate agreement.  
  The world needs you to be climate champions, all of you.  
  
 
 
  2.14pm BST  
  
  Guterres says with leadership committed to strategic cooperation the world can avoid war.  
  He calls the gathered heads of state guardians of the common good.  
  Guterres commits to making the UN more effective and argues that improving global relations will improve the trust deficit he mentioned earlier.  
  He references major global conflicts, including the war in Syria, conflict in Yemen, the Rohingya crisis and the Israel-Palestine conflict.  
  
 
 
  2.08pm BST  
 Guterres: world facing 'trust deficit disorder' 
  
  UN secretary general, Antnio Guterres, has taken the stage after a video tribute to Kofi Annan, the former secretary general who died in August and a short film about the UN sustainable development goals.  
  Guterres begins: Our world is suffering from a bad case of trust deficit disorder.  
  He says people are losing trust in institutions and global relations are more divisive. 
  Trust in global governance is also fragile, he says. 
  We face a set of paradoxes: the world is more connected, yet societies are becoming more fragmented.  
   
   We face a set of paradoxes.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\"> 
    
    Guterres: We face a set of paradoxes. 
    Photograph: Shannon Stapleton/Reuters 
    
   
  
 Updated at 2.17pm BST 
 
 
  2.01pm BST  
  
  Yesterday, the French foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, warned that Syria faces perpetual war unless Russia agrees to turn the one-month ceasefire in Idlib into a wider UN-endorsed political agreement. 
  The US national security adviser, John Bolton, also raised the prospect of an endless conflict at the UN general assembly: 
   
    Related: Syria faces perpetual war unless Russia extends ceasefire, France warns  
   
  
 
 
  1.52pm BST  
  
  Hello and welcome 
  Welcome to our live coverage of the United Nations general assemblys general debate, where world leaders will present their priorities to the international stage. 
  The session will open at about 9am local time in New York (2pm in London) with remarks by secretary-general Antnio Guterres. He will be followed the president of the general assembly, Mara Fernanda Espinosa Garcs. 
  Then, as is customary, Brazil will be the first country to speak, followed immediately by US president Donald Trump, who in last years remarks threatened to totally destroy North Korea. 
  Well have live updates of todays speeches here, with analysis from the Guardians team of experts, including world affairs editor, Julian Borger, who is reporting from the UNs New York headquarters. As we wait for Guterres to take the stage, you can read Julians preview of the summit. 
   
    Related: Diplomats gather for UN summit  with Trump and his whims to take centre stage  
   
  
 Updated at 1.53pm BST 
"
"194""Japans prime minister, Shinz Abe, has appointed just one women to his new cabinet, raising questions about his commitment to make women shine in business and public life. But he claimed that the regional revitalisation minister, Satsuki Katayama, had the presence of two or three women. Deepening the controversy over gender equality in Japan, Katayama was forced to buy a new dress after being told her outfits did not comply with the existing official dress code. Abe was accused of repaying party factional debts rather than addressing the gender imbalance in politics following his reshuffle on Tuesday, a fortnight after he was re-elected president of the ruling Liberal Democratic party (LDP). His victory virtually guarantees he will still be in office in November next year, making him the countrys longest-serving prime minister. But his decision to appoint one women to the relatively low-profile role of regional revitalisation minister prompted criticism from an outgoing female minister and uncomfortable questions at his post-reshuffle press conference.   s minister in charge of local economic revitalisation Satsuki Katayama at a news conference in Tokyo\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Japans new regional revitalisation minister, Satsuki Katayama, at a news conference in Tokyo. Photograph: Issei Kato/Reuters    Asked why there was only one women in his 19-member cabinet  one fewer than in his previous lineup  Abe claimed he had only just embarked on his womenomics campaign to raise the standing of women in the workplace, although it is a cause he first championed soon after becoming prime minister in late 2012. We must recognise that the ratio of women cabinet ministers is low compared with other countries, but Japan has just begun to create a society where women can be more active, he said. I think we will nurture people who can become cabinet ministers. He claimed that the lone female appointee, the former career bureaucrat Katayama, had the determination of multiple women. She is incredibly feisty. I know there is only one women in this cabinet, but Ms Katayama has the presence of two or three women. I hope she will use that to promote the goal of female empowerment, he said, according to the Japan Times. Seiko Noda, who was replaced as internal affairs minister by a man, said she was extremely worried about the lack of female representation in senior positions in the party. Katayama, whose brief includes promoting gender equality, was forced to buy a new dress shortly before a ceremony at the Imperial Palace to announce the new ministers, after a Cabinet Office official said neither of her two existing outfits met the dress code. The Mainichi newspaper said cabinet officials told her other outfits were inappropriate because the jackets and dresses were different colours, adding that a long dress and jacket of the same colour was the norm  reportedly suggesting silver. Katayama and her secretary rushed to a department store and later returned to her office carrying a bag. I found an outfit that follows the dress code, she told reporters, according to Kyodo News. She wore a long silver dress with matching jacket in the official photos. While the new cabinet includes 12 first-time appointees, Abe was accused of rewarding politicians who supported his LDP re-election campaign and who can be relied on to back his agenda, including plans to revise the countrys pacifist constitution. He has appointed old friends and reliable allies and kept people in key portfolios to buy stability, said Jeffrey Kingston, the director of Asian studies at Temple University in Tokyo, adding that Katayamas appointment exposes the empty grandstanding on womenomics. The challenges facing women in the Japanese workplace received widespread attention this summer after it was revealed that Tokyo Medical University had deliberately altered entrance exam scores for more than a decade to restrict the number of female students and ensure more men became doctors. Earlier this week, Yuka Ogata, a female local assembly member, claimed she was being targeted by male colleagues after taking her baby son into the chamber last year to highlight the difficulties encountered by working parents. Ogata, whose experience generated negative headlines about Japans treatment of women in the workplace, was expelled from a session of the Kumamoto municipal assembly last week for sucking a cough sweet while addressing colleagues. Japan ranked 114th out of 144 countries in the World Economic Forums global gender equality rankings last year  down three places from a year earlier and the lowest among the G7 nations. The report said the poor assessment reflected the low number of women in politics. Only 10% of MPs in Japans lower house are women, according to the Inter-Parliamentary Union."
"195""Britains leading Muslim organisation has launched a scheme to train women for leadership positions in mosques and community bodies. 
Twenty women have embarked on the six-month intensive programme run by the Muslim Council of Britain, aimed at equipping them for leadership positions. As well as one-to-one mentoring, the women will visit best-practice mosques and be given media and public speaking training. 
A national conference in Manchester this weekend on the future of mosques, organised by the MCB, will include a session on the participation of women on boards of trustees and other bodies running places of worship and community programmes. 
Few mosques in the UK have women on their trustee or management boards, and men outnumber women on all charity trustee boards by two to one, according to the Charity Commission. 
The MCB said: This lack of diversity is unacceptable and it is essential for the management boards of mosques and third sector organisations in general to reflect the communities that they serve in order to function effectively. 
The initiative comes as some Muslim women are demanding equal access to and greater involvement in running mosques. More than a quarter of mosques in the UK have no facilities for women, and in the remainder access is often restricted and the space they are allocated is limited. 
In August, Scottish Muslim women launched a campaign for equal prayer space and inclusion in decision-making bodies. 
The Scottish Mosques for All campaign said: It is unfortunate that many mosques fail to provide basic access for Muslim women to use the facility to pray, or the quality of the space can often be inadequate and not suitable. 
 
  
  
   
     
    
    News doesn't always have to be bad  indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do.
    This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come.
    Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com
    
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
  Sign up here for a weekly roundup from this series emailed to your inbox every Friday
  
 
It is also unfortunate that many mosques have limited or no women present at mosque trustee or managerial level, either intentionally preventing women from taking up these roles or not sufficiently providing a welcoming atmosphere where women feel comfortable to get involved. The place and role of women in mosques is in real crisis in the UK and elsewhere, and this status quo must change. 
Another organisation, Open My Mosque, is calling for a commitment from mosques to equality, and the Bradford-based Muslim women Council is raising funds for a mosque led and governed by women, based on the principles of openness, inclusivity, social justice and sanctuary. 
Andleen Razzaq, a former trustee of Al Manaar mosque in west London, who is lead facilitator of the MCBs women in mosques development programme, said: Muslim women are doing amazing work in the community, but often have no experience of being trustees or on decision-making bodies. We need to have big conversations around the barriers to women. Most are cultural; in Islam, men and women have equal spiritual standing. 
We can see the direction things are moving in. Women are feeling more empowered  their voices cannot be ignored, the momentum is definitely there. Young women in particular are hungry for change. If men wont welcome them, women will be tempted to create their own spaces. 
All mosques should reflect the values of equality, inclusivity and diversity, she added. 
Ghazalla Hussain, who is taking part in the programme, said it was helping her build her confidence and believe in myself a bit more. A lot of mosque committees dont understand what women want or need. But I think they know times are changing, and they have to change too, she said. 
In a speech on International women Day in March, Harun Khan, the MCBs secretary general, backed calls for gender equality. It was time to ensure that everyone understands their own responsibility in achieving equal access and opportunities for men and women in British society today, he said. 
Referring to domestic violence, pay inequality, abuse and harassment, he said: Closer to home, why is Muslim civil society still full of many mosques that only have prayer spaces for men and none for women, as if to imply that prayer and a sense of community is only for men? 
The marginalisation of women in mosques was simply unacceptable, Khan added. 
The MCBs training programme for women will be reviewed at the end of the current pilot scheme, and there are plans to offer a similar programme to men in the future. 
This article is part of a series on possible solutions to some of the worlds most stubborn problems. What else should we cover? Email us at theupside@theguardian.com"
"196""He covered my mouth with his hand and introduced his penis. I thought my last hour had arrived. I had the feeling my stomach was turning. These are not the words of a women testifying as part of the #MeToo movement, and they are not the words of Christine Blasey Ford, who testified against the US supreme court nominee Brett Kavanaugh last week  although the hand over the mouth, if not the reference to the penis, mirror her words. (Kavanaugh denies the allegations.) This is, instead, the experience of a young women as recounted by the French feminist and philosopher Simone de Beauvoir in her 1949 classic The Second Sex. I took that book down from the shelf about a month ago; it had sat there, untouched, for years. How many times had I pretended to have read it, nodding knowingly when someone mentioned it at a dinner party, or in a seminar at the Swedish university where I work? A year after the first revelations about the Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein, I wanted to to sit down and read about women experiences, to stay silent for a while, and hopefully learn something. It has been painful to listen to the stories of systematic sexual abuse that have emerged as a result of the #MeToo movement, and also an education; it has forced me to see things I had failed to see in the past. Before, I knew sexual assaults were endemic, but I didnt realise they were this endemic. I also understood that the blame is often put on the victim. But I had never really seen this, not in such a concrete and shockingly visible way. It has been a late awakening and, over the course of the year, a couple of overdue questions emerged: what can men do to show solidarity with women, and what can we do to address a culture of toxic masculinity and begin examining ourselves? There is clearly more than one way to do this. The journalist Richard Godwin has described in the Guardian how, in his quest to examine modern manhood, he found groups where men were doing breathing exercises, talking about their fathers, pretending to be tigers, leaning in on one another, working out which Jungian archetype we vibed with, and trying to articulate why we all felt so defensive and angry and misunderstood so much of the time. I opted for a quieter approach, following the advice that, to show solidarity with the movement, you could begin by seriously listening to women. So I decided to spend the month leading up to the first anniversary of the Weinstein revelations reading some feminist classics, which, for inexplicable reasons, I had never got round to. Im sure there are embarrassing and unflattering underlying reasons for this omission, but Im not sure what they are. Perhaps it was as depressingly simple as the fact that the works of (white) male authors had always been closer to hand  through reading lists and book reviews and recommendations  than the works of (black) feminist writers.     Simone de Beauvoir in 1957. Photograph: Jack Nisberg/Sipa Press/Rex Features    With the help of two editors from this newspaper, a list of 13 books was compiled  far from comprehensive, but including some of the most influential feminist works of the last few centuries. A Vindication of the Rights of women by Mary Wollstonecraft, 1792; The Second Sex, Simone de Beauvoir, 1949; The Feminine Mystique, Betty Friedan, 1963; The Female Eunuch, Germaine Greer, 1970; women Hating, Andrea Dworkin, 1974; Women, Race and Class, Angela Davis, 1981; Sister Outsider, Audre Lorde, 1984; Gender Trouble, Judith Butler, 1990; Feminism Is for Everybody, bell hooks, 2000; Lean In, Sheryl Sandberg, 2013; Men Explain Things to Me, Rebecca Solnit, 2014; Bad Feminist, Roxane Gay, 2014; We Should All Be Feminists, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, 2014. In early September, I started reading. Halfway through De Beauvoirs The Second Sex, I came across a passage that seemed to sum up the shocking insight of #MeToo. De Beauvoir writes that almost all young women, including what she calls well-protected ones, have been exposed to regrettable incidents, which, in conventional circles, are hushed up by common agreement. This reminded me of last autumn, and the experience of watching the evening news with my wife and eight-year-old daughter as the welter of #MeToo allegations began. The news anchor read out some of the testimonies that had been shared on social media. Usually, when horrible things are reported, we could, as a well-protected family, who previously lived in Wales, now in Sweden, calm my daughter down by saying that these things hardly ever happen in our neighbourhood. But we couldnt do that now. These regrettable incidents could not be hushed up by common agreement. De Beauvoir tells the story in her book of a young girl, no more than 10 years old, who is molested by her grandfather. She cannot find the courage to tell her parents. De Beauvoir writes: Such incidents are usually endured in silence for the little girl because of the shame they cause. Moreover, if she does reveal them to her parents, their reaction is often to reprimand her. Dont say such stupid things  youve got an evil mind. I remember reading the detailed allegations against Jean-Claude Arnault, the influential cultural figure who is married to one of the members of the Swedish Academy, which awards the Nobel prize; he used to casually call himself the academys 19th member. In an article published in the Dagens Nyheter newspaper, 18 women came forward to tell their stories. In graphic detail, they described instances of abuse and rape, and like Weinstein, Arnault was accused of exploiting his power to threaten and blackmail women. He was alleged to have targeted, in particular, those who were weak, vulnerable and damaged. On Monday, he was convicted of one count of rape and sentenced to two years in prison. The other cases were dropped for lack of evidence or because they had exceeded the statute of limitations. Only four of the women who testified against him showed their faces. They were the ones who had rejected him outright when he had tried to grope them in bars and elsewhere. Never before had I quite grasped the shame of being the victim as I did when reading this line, from one of the women who had been raped and did not show her face: I was ashamed I was one of those he chose as victim, to be one of the damaged women. Worse than simply being the victim, he had chosen her as his victim, because she was damaged and too weak to say no. I had known, for a long time, that blame is casually ascribed to women who are attacked. I had known this, in theory, as an abstraction. I wonder why #MeToo had to happen for this to stop being an abstraction to me. This story has, after all, been told a thousand times before. It was there, in large print, in the books I read throughout September. I mean, is it possible to read the following story, from Gays Bad Feminist, and still think of shame as an abstraction? She writes about an 11-year-old girl who was raped by a group of boys and men in Texas, and the fact that the New York Times chose to headline their story Vicious Assault Shakes Texas Town  as if we should feel sorry for the town and the boys. It was an 11-year-old girl whose body was ripped apart, not a town, Gay writes. It was an 11-year-old girls life that was ripped apart, not the lives of the men who raped her.     Roxane Gay in 2014. Photograph: Jennifer Silverberg for the Guardian    A few weeks after the allegations against Weinstein began emerging, a liberal columnist in Sweden wrote that we need to distinguish between real victims and fake victims, claiming that, if all women were as thick-skinned as his 19-year-old daughter, there would be no #MeToo. The problem, he wrote, was that too many women want to assume the role of victims. Their problem is that they dont know how to say no and to stand their ground. It never crossed my mind to say no or that I should say no, that I could say no, writes Gay. When she was 12, a boy she thought was her boyfriend started pressuring her to have sex. One day they were riding their bikes in the woods. She didnt know that his friends were waiting for them by an abandoned hunting cabin. The boy pushed her to the ground and took her clothes off. She was raped by the group, who kept her there for hours. I felt fear but I didnt know how to say no. After she was raped, Gay didnt say a word to anyone. She didnt want to get into trouble. I was a good girl, so thats what I did. In class the next day, one of the boys leaned towards her and said: Youre a slut. A few days after the liberal columnist said women should be more like his 19-year-old daughter, hundreds of Swedish women, all actors, came together under the hashtag #SilenceAction, publishing a long series of detailed accounts of brutal sexual assault. Here is one of the many testimonies. In a hotel, after a party, a women is on her way into her room. A man  a world-famous actor  follows her. He pushes her to the floor and throws himself on top of her. Now hell rape me, she remembers thinking. I wanted to ask the liberal columnist: how would your thick-skinned 19-year-old daughter deal with that? Before #MeToo, I had not really understood the connection between power and sexual abuse. I had seen it, of course. But again, only really in theory, as an abstraction. In Men Explain Things to Me, Solnit writes that she surprised herself once when she began an essay by recounting what was, ostensibly, a funny incident  a man refusing to be interrupted while explaining, in great detail, the content of a book she had actually authored. That same essay ended in her writing about rape and murder. These incidents are situated on a continuum, she argues, which stretches from minor social misery to violent silencing and death. Dead men dont rape, read a poster that used to hang over Dworkins desk. By the time Id read a third of the books on the list, I didnt blame her. In the acerbic pages of women Hating, Dworkin writes that, as a women, you have to ask yourself a number of pressing questions: Why everywhere the oppression of women throughout recorded history? How could the Inquisitors torture and burn women as witches? How could men idealise the bound feet of crippled women? How and why? There were books on my list that were not quite as brutal; books less concerned with rape and sexual oppression than with the cultural pressure on women and how to be a women. At the end of Wollstonecrafts A Vindication of the Rights of women, she sets out a future experiment, by which women would share with men the advantages of education and government. In The Female Eunuch, Greer argues that women need to stop seeing themselves as wives and mothers because, confined to these roles, their horizon shrinks to the house, the shopping centre and the telly. By 2013, Sandberg, the chief operating officer at Facebook, was writing from a business perspective about the need for more women in leadership roles. Her advice to women, expressed in the title of her book, is to lean in  to do what you would do if you werent afraid. I nodded my way through these books, recalling the discussions that started at my university about a year ago when, emboldened by what seemed like a revolutionary moment, we discussed a range of radical ideas to facilitate the career possibilities for women, from offering significant research time to women to recruiting women to senior academic positions. One year later, these initiatives have boiled down to a not-so-radical mentoring programme. If these books were familiar, written from a predominantly white, privileged perspective, the next titles were not. Davis begins Women, Race and Class by describing the life of the female slave. Davis notes that, while white women of the abolitionist movement spoke out on behalf of black women, they were unable to grasp the slave womens condition, because the black women, through her experience of hard work, rape, flogging and resistance, had developed traits that set her apart from the white women. The black women, like working-class women, worked until they could work no more. They could only dream of the life of the white housewives. One of the problems with the women movement, Lorde writes in Sister Outsider, is that white women focus upon their oppression as women and ignore differences of race, sexual preference, class and age. As a consequence, women of colour become other, the outsider.     Audre Lorde in 1983. Photograph: Robert Alexander/Getty Images    As I finished the last book, I was thinking about all the men  and many women  who refuse to call themselves feminists. The writer bell hooks says that whenever she introduces herself as a feminist, people respond that feminists are lesbians who hate men and want to make life miserable for white men. When she then asks them about the feminist books theyve read, they go silent. We need to create a mass-based educational movement to teach everyone about feminism, hooks writes in Feminism Is for Everybody, and I cant stop thinking that this is what #MeToo is. Sure, #MeToo is many things, and some feminists, including Greer, have openly criticised the movement. It has been suggested that many of the incidents are too minor to warrant serious attention, and that women should be better at saying no and reacting immediately if assaulted. Im reminded of this when I speak to a female friend, a few days before finishing this article. When she says she is surprised to learn I am pro-#MeToo, I find myself responding defensively, assuring her that I do recognise some unfortunate potential side-effects. As if to avoid the broader questions of #MeToo and feminism, we end up discussing the tragic case of a man who killed himself after allegations of sexual abuse that later proved false. A year after the first Weinstein allegations, it could be tempting to look back and focus only on examples of where #MeToo went wrong. But we need to remember why the movement, first started by the civil rights activist Tarana Burke in 2006, had to take the form it did. It is not as if these stories are new. They just hadnt been heard properly. And that was one of the most uncomfortable insights from reading these books: that the stories of sexual abuse that emerged last year had been there all along, for centuries. They just hadnt been discussed, publicly, in the way they have now. A year ago, in the Guardian, the writer Emily Reynolds asked what men could do to examine themselves and show solidarity with the movement; she advised men to ask women questions and start listening. Im sure there is much to be learned from going on a man camp and discussing masculinity with other men, but I believe the simple advice from Reynolds is potentially more powerful: ask, read, listen, widen your perspective, call your own perspectives into question. Only 7% of Britons consider themselves feminists, according to a 2016 Fawcett Society survey, which seems strange to me after reading these books, because the definitions I come across are open, simple, obvious  such as wanting to end sexism or supporting the social, political and economic equality of the sexes. In We Should All Be Feminists, the Nigerian novelist Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie writes that when she started describing herself as a feminist, she was told feminists were angry, so she called herself a Happy Feminist. Then she was told that feminism was unAfrican, so she called herself a Happy African Feminist. She continued to make amendments until, at some point, she was a Happy African Feminist Who Does Not Hate Men and Who Likes to Wear Lip Gloss and High Heels for Herself and Not for Men. We hold feminism to an unreasonable standard, Gay writes, as though both feminists and feminism must be flawless. She says she is not very well versed in feminist history. She has a wardrobe full of shoes and bags. She listens to sexist rap and reads Vogue. But so what? She is full of contradictions, like everyone else. I would rather be a bad feminist than no feminist at all, she writes, and on reading this line, I see an opening, an invitation to me and all the other men who wish to be supportive. I think: if she can be a feminist, then maybe we can, too. Even though, of course, Im sure Ill be a much worse feminist than she is. What to read: 13 feminist classics  A Vindication of the Rights of women by Mary Wollstonecraft, 1792 The Second Sex, Simone de Beauvoir, 1949 The Feminine Mystique, Betty Friedan, 1963 The Female Eunuch, Germaine Greer, 1970 women Hating, Andrea Dworkin, 1974 Women, Race and Class, Angela Davis, 1981 Sister Outsider, Audre Lorde, 1984 Gender Trouble, Judith Butler, 1990 Feminism Is for Everybody, bell hooks, 2000 Lean In, Sheryl Sandberg, 2013 Men Explain Things to Me, Rebecca Solnit, 2014 Bad Feminist, Roxane Gay, 2014 We Should All Be Feminists, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, 2014.  The Happiness Fantasy by Carl Cederstrm is published by Polity. Buy a copy for 12.99 from theguardianbookshop.com"
