"x"
"1""Activists have called on Canadian leaders to introduce concrete policies to confront discrimination against women and girls after the country fell from first to 25th in the United Nations gender equality ranking. The criticism comes as the United Nations holds its 65th annual meeting to eliminate gender discrimination, and just a few months after the countrys prime minister, Justin Trudeau, was praised for a speech to the UN in New York, where he said, I am a feminist.       m going to keep calling myself a feminist - video\"            data-video-provider=\"Reuters\"            >    Justin Trudeau: Im going to keep calling myself a feminist    Canada fails to respect, protect and fulfill the social and economic rights of women and girls, a group of 14 non-profit organizations said in a statement. Too many women in Canada experience poverty, homelessness, insecure housing, woefully inadequate social assistance incomes, food insecurity and other violations of the right to an adequate standard of living. The groups, which include Amnesty International, the Native women Association of Canada and Oxfam, pointed to Trudeaus comments on gender equality and his pledges to improve relations with the countrys indigenous population. Canada has a new federal government with a Prime Minister who says he is a feminist, calls for a nation-to-nation relationship, and acknowledges that poverty is sexist. We know words matter, but now we need action, the statement said. Historically, the United Nations work toward gender equality has included an annual Gender Inequality Index, an international ranking in which Canada has steadily fallen. In 1995, Canada held the top spot, but has fallen to 25th over the last 20 years.  The report includes data on reproductive health, empowerment and economic inclusion. The GII uses maternal death rates and teen pregnancy, the number of women who hold national elected office and have secondary education, and participation in the labor market to weigh countries progress toward equality.  In their criticism of Canada, the groups said they were concerned about access to abortion, particularly in rural and northern areas, and said they were dismayed by the countrys continued wage gap between the sexes and even between women. Were looking to the new government thats taken over, who has made lots of promises around women equality, said Kasari Govender, executive director of the West Coast women Legal Education and Action Fund (Leaf). Are they actually going to truly act on the damage that has been done over the last couple decades that have eroded women equality?  Govender pointed to what she said was a 12% wage disparity between women with children and those without, what she called a motherhood tax, as well as difficulties women face finding childcare.  The groups were especially critical of the Canadian governments failure to serve the needs of indigenous women.    Related: Think Canada is a progressive paradise? Thats mooseshit    Indigenous women and girls in Canada suffer some of the worlds highest suicide rates, overrepresentation in prison and high rates of sexualized violence, said Professor Pam Palmater, chair of indigenous governance at Ryerson University.  These conditions are brought on by years of colonization, theft of lands and resources, discriminatory state legislation, chronic underfunding of critical social programs like water, food, housing, health and education and the theft of children into foster care. After his election in 2015, Trudeau won praise for naming a cabinet with equal numbers of men and women  the first time in Canadas history. But some activists have argued that the prime ministers policy proposals have yet to overcome more complex systematic sexism, such as federal budget proposals that favored male-dominated industries. For example, the government recently failed to pass a bill that would have financially penalized political parties for failing to run near-equal slates of male and female candidates.  We were more cautiously optimistic a few months ago, said Armine Yalnizyan, senior economist for the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, a group not affiliated with the activists that called on Canadian leaders to enact more meaningful legislation. It has been a year, and there has not been much action other than the appointment of women to cabinet. The authors of the statement said there remains, a significant implementation gap between Canadas human rights obligations for women and their realization within domestic laws, policies and programs.  It is time for our federal government to take leadership and work with provinces and territories to implement the [UN convention against discrimination]."
"2""Young Australian women believe sexism to be preventing them from fulfilling their potential, a new report has found. Plan International Australia and Our Watch surveyed 600 girls and young women aged between 15 and 19 on their inexperiences of inequality between December 2015 and February 2016. The findings, released on Tuesday for the International Day of the Girl, show that more than two-thirds (69%) thought gender inequality was a problem in Australia, even as the same proportion agreed that they had more opportunities than their mothers generation. Just 8% felt they were always treated equally to boys, and only one in six said they were always given the same opportunities to succeed.   Related: This is what happens when you call out sexism in Australia | Erin Riley    The report indicated that young women experienced widespread discrimination, lack of safety, and disrespect in a variety of spheres, including while at home, online, in public, at work and in their relationships. The wide-reaching, reactive impact of this inequality was evident in 23% agreeing with the statement that girls should not travel alone on public transport and nearly one-third that girls should not be out in public places after dark. Researchers said this suggested that respondents had internalised victim-blaming beliefs that the onus was on them to modify their behaviour to prevent sexual assault. Young women also experienced gender inequality at home, with more than a third (36%) saying their brothers or other boys seldom or never did their equal share of the housework. More than 40% said lack of support for working parents, such as parental leave and affordable childcare, would impact their decision to start a family of their own. Barriers to young women reaching their full intellectual potential were also evident, with more than half saying they were sometimes, seldom or never valued for their brains and ability more than their looks. One in three felt that it would be easier to pursue their dream career if they were male. Though most girls and young women agreed that Australia was becoming more equal at a structural and societal level, there was more ambivalence in response to questions of everyday sexism. Thirty-one per cent said they neither agreed nor disagreed that sexist attitudes in Australia are decreasing, compared with 25% who disagreed with the statement and 42% who agreed. Less than a third (30%) agreed that they identified as feminists, with 27% disagreeing and 36% ambivalent. Sherry-Rose Watts, a 20-year-old Melbourne student and a youth ambassador for Plan International Australia, said the term had baggage and was often fundamentally misunderstood. I think young women are committed to fighting sexism, but are less inclined to call themselves feminists because it ... may give others a negative impression of them, or associate them with things that they are not comfortable with. She added that young women who were explicit about identifying as feminists were often targets. I dont know that there are many young women who have the resilience, by virtue of age or exposure, to be able to deal with that level of criticism or ridicule  from their peers, social media, all of society. Watts was not one of the respondents of the survey, but said disappointingly she was not surprised by its findings.   Related: Its Australia. In 2016. And girls believe its not worth pursuing their dreams | Susanne Legena    To an extent we have achieved greater equality than past generations, however, if I still feel as one in 10 girls do, that Im not treated equally as a boy, as the males that I work and socialise alongside, then yes, there is still a big problem and a huge way to go in solving it. Eighty-two per cent of the 600 survey respondents were in high school or university while 10% were employed and 1% were in apprenticeships; just over a third were either 18 or 19 at the time of the survey. Fourteen individuals  2% of the total  identified as Aboriginal Australian and/or Torres Strait Islanders. Recommendations made on the strength of the survey ranged from urban and transport planners consulting with girls and young women to make public places that are safe and inclusive, to ensuring responsible reporting in the media of violence against women."
"3""When Raj Khairas brother was born, ladoos, a popular celebratory Indian sweet, were sprinkled among the community like confetti. When her sister came along, the extended family cried. Which is why Khaira, now a lawyer, launched the Pink Ladoo project a year ago to mark the International Day of the Girl Child. This year she brought it to London and locations in Canada as well. The idea is simple: hand out pink ladoos when a daughter is born as a counterpoint to the golden sweets distributed at the birth of a son. The pink ladoo is a symbol of protest against gender bias, one that you can make sense of immediately, says Khaira. The birth announcement is the first tradition to be skewed towards the male child, and the pink ladoos hope to change that. Diaspora communities tend to hold on to customs stubbornly, and we want them to analyse the gender bias in them. The response to the campaign both offline and on social media has been phenomenal.  Most interestingly, the staff at the hospitals have given us great feedback, saying the disappointment of bearing a daughter is a larger issue than most people realise.     A girl and a women walk past a billboard in New Delhi encouraging the birth of girls. Photograph: Raveendran/AFP/Getty Images    The preference for boys in India starts before birth: tens of thousands of girls are thought to be aborted each year, resulting in a wildly distorted gender ratio. Indias most recent census found there were 940 girls born for every 1,000 boys. The skew is worst in Haryana, a rural, northern state bordering Delhi, where just 830 girls are born for every 1,000 boys.  The gloom surrounding the birth of girls prompted Navi Brar, a 24-year-old nurse from Alberta in Canada, to get involved with Khairas campaign. I always found myself being the one person speaking up to family members for making any parent feel remorse for having a baby girl, she says. I felt this campaign allowed me to stand up for gender equality, and reach a bigger audience. She says such a campaign is more relevant than ever because of the significant strides south Asian women have made, and continue to make  despite girls in the community still being viewed as less important than their male counterparts.  This cultural preference for males goes far past birth and continues to follow girls throughout their lifetime. I think this campaign is challenging south Asians, men and women, to stand up and provoke change in the traditional mentality and create a new normal of celebrating both boys and girls.      The Pink Ladoo project runs social media campaigns throughout the year. Photograph: Courtesy of Pink Ladoo campaign    The project is not a once-a-yearevent. Throughout other months the group runs social media campaigns, sharing stories of inspiring everyday women, posts from families who have celebrated their daughters with pink ladoos, and stories of the slights that mothers of girls have faced. A recent viral social media post told the powerful story of a bride whose mother gave her away at her wedding  a ritual traditionally reserved for men. The positive response to the post left the brides mother, UK-based Jasbir Kaur, feeling vindicated. I knew it would be a big deal in my community but I never thought something so personal to my family would gain global reach; I was simply fulfilling my duty as a parent, she says. In that moment and after, the feeling I had was a sense of achievement.Since I played the dual role of mother and father, I felt it was my absolute right to do this.  There is still a long way to go in changing peoples mindsets over gender-based roles, but the Pink Ladoo project is a step in the right direction. They are questioning the unfairness, which was not easy for my generation to do. The best compliment, says Khaira, was when she called a UK sweet shop to ask them to participate and make pink ladoos  and found that they were already one of their best-selling sweets."
"4""In Colombia, its often said, everyone is a doctor until proven otherwise.  Not a medical doctor or even a PhD, that is: in Colombias daily lexicon, the word is a form of address for anyone judged to hold a superior social station  or for those who wield power in the tangled web of bureaucracy. Expecting to be called doctor or doctora is a mark of endemic snobbery in a country where class distinctions are so entrenched that Colombians are formally classified into social strata depending not on their income but on where they live. In attempt to eliminate linguistic snootiness the mayor of Cali, Colombias third largest city, has decided to ban the term doctor, and other forms of formal address, in municipal offices.  In the city offices the word doctor or don are prohibited, declared Mayor Maurice Armitage earlier this month. Through an education campaign, he hopes to spread the practice throughout the city.  We are all going to be equal and we dont have to feel superior or inferior because you are called doctor or don or seor, he said. All municipal workers have been given name tags so they can be addressed by their given names. Armitage has invited his staff to address him as Maurice.  The national daily El Espectador welcomed the measure. We support this type of measures which force us to reflect on the use of language and open the door to change relationships between people, the paper wrote in an editorial.  But it will take more than a decree to change the use of doctor  a previous attempt to ban the word in Bogot was dropped after a few months.  Some linguists trace the use back to the 1920s when Colombian lawyers were required to hold a PhD to be able to practice certain types of law.  The doctors were the most revered in their profession and colleagues took to calling them that as a sign of deference. When the restrictions were lifted on the legal practice, every lawyer became a doctor, and the usage then spread to other professions.  Today, though there are only a few hundred PhD holders in the country, the spurious title has evolved to become a pervasive marker of class and power. And any Colombian knows that when fighting your way through a labyrinth of red tape, its always a good idea to address the person behind the desk as doctor or doctora. If it makes them feel better about themselves  and they may be more inclined to get things done."
"5""Germany is to try to bridge the pay gap between men and women by forcing companies to be more transparent about wage structures. Angela Merkels centre-right Christian Democrats and their centre-left coalition allies have agreed in principle on rules under which employees at businesses with more than 200 staff will have a right to see anonymised data on the wages of men and women in comparable positions. Companies with more than 500 employees will be asked to carry out checks and publish reports on gender pay parity every five years. In order to establish a system of comparing professional roles across a variety of sectors, Germany will introduce a points-based system that breaks down wages into separate parts. The regulations will apply to about 14 million workers in Germany, including those in the public sector. The Social Democrat family minister, Manuela Schwesig, who proposed the measures 10 months ago, described Thursdays agreement as an important breakthrough.  Discussions between the two coalition parties had stalled because of CDU concerns that the requirements would increase bureaucracy and create a climate of distrust and surveillance. It is unclear when the rules will become law. According to the countrys office for statistics, women in Germany earn on average 21% less than men, often due to the fact that women are less likely to be employed in highly paid sectors and more likely to work part-time.  Even when such factors are accounted for, women on average still earn 7% less than men working in comparable positions. The gender pay gap continues to be wider in the western half of the country than in the states that used to make up the communist east. In 2015 the gap stood at 8% in the former GDR and 23% in the west. Germany was ranked 11th in the World Economic Forums 2015 global gender gap report, behind the likes of Iceland, Norway, Finland and Sweden."
"6""Human rights activists in Mexico have reacted with fury after a man accused of sexually abusing an eight-year old girl was ordered to buy the victims father two crates of beer as compensation. The perpetrator, identified as a 55-year-old former pastor, was given the sanction after the victims parents complained to the municipal government in Santiago Quetzalapa, a remote indigenous community without road access or cellular phone coverage some 450km south-east of Mexico City. He was only arrested after local media coverage of the fine prompted widespread outrage in the state. In a statement to the Guardian, the Oaxaca state attorney generals office said that police arrested a man on Friday morning on charges of aggravated rape.  The case has highlighted both Mexicos poor record at investigating sexual crimes, and a unique form of government in Oaxaca state, where many indigenous communities are ruled by an idiosyncratic system popularly known as usos y costumbres (traditions and customs).   map   Helder Palacios, editorial director of the Ruta 135 website which initially reported the case, said that Santiago Quetzalapa has a history of abuses which have been handled locally and not attracted the attention of outside authorities. There are cases in which there was impunity, theres no investigation and local prosecutors never receive a criminal complaint, he said. The system is supposed to enshrine the traditions of local populations in a state with diverse indigenous populations, but it has been criticised for allowing local leaders to settle disputes according to their own beliefs rather than the written law. The argument in these municipalities is that they are governed by their own traditions and customs, but they ultimately end up committing human rights abuses, Palacios said. In situations of sexual violence a lot of cases are settled this way: with a bottle of liquor, said Graciela Zabaleta, director of the Mahatma Gandhi Human Rights Centre in the city of Tuxtepec.   Related: Mexican rape victim, 13, denied access to abortion    Many of victims and their families, she says, never report the crimes committed against them or bring their cases to the attention of judicial offices.  Officials in usos y costumbres communities have previously used the framework as a pretext to exclude women from local government.  In one notable case, an indigenous women named Eufrosina Cruz Mendoza won the mayoral election, but was denied office by local leaders because of her gender. Cruz later went on to serve as speaker of the Oaxaca state legislature. A constitutional amendment in 2015 mandated that women be given equal say in electing and participating in governments in indigenous communities, which have the right to run their own affairs. Zabaleta, whose human rights centre works on gender equality issues in indigenous communities, says she has seen other improvements over the last 25 years. When I started, girls were sold for a piece of land or donkeys or for money, she says. Things have gotten better. "
"7""The crowd of women packed into the historic square of Plaza de Mayo in downtown Buenos Aires under the freezing rain was so vast that some had to close their umbrellas to all fit together. Machismo Kills, read the hand-painted sign held aloft by one young women.   Related: The Guardian view on #NiUnaMenos: challenging misogyny and murder | Editorial    Tens of thousands of women marched here on Wednesday to protest the growing problem of violence against women in Argentina, a problem so prevalent that the country sanctioned a law four years ago legally defining as femicide cases of domestic violence, so-called honour killings and other categories of hate crimes against women.     Hundreds of protesters carrying umbrellas take part in a demonstration demanding an end to violence against women in Buenos Aires. Photograph: Victor R. Caivano/AP    The Buenos Aires march was matched by others across Argentina and other South American countries, after women groups called for solidarity via social media under the hashtags #NiUnaMenos (Not one less, meaning not one more women lost to male violence) and #BlackWednesday. This is a march against femicide, supreme court judge Elena Highton deNolasco told the press on the eve of the march. Cases of femicide aregrowing in number, they are becoming more violent, more perverse  we evenhad the news today that there have been 19 femicides in the last 18 days.     A women takes part in a protest in Mexico City to highlight violence against women. Photograph: Alfredo Estrella/AFP/Getty Images    Walking home I want to feel free, not brave, read another sign by one of the marchers on Wednesday. I came because they are killing women who could be my sisters, my friends, said one young marcher. Similar marches were held in all of Argentinas main cities, while the Ni Una Menos movement transcended the countrys borders. Demonstrations also took place in Mexico, El Salvador, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay.   a Prez.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"667\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Demonstrators in San Salvador, El Salvador, protest against violence and the murder of 16-year-old Luca Prez. Photograph: Jose Cabezas/Reuters    The protest was prompted by the abduction of Luca Prez, a schoolgirl who was drugged, raped and tortured earlier this month in the coastal city of Mar del Plata.   Related: 'We live in constant fear': Argentina's women on marching against violence    The cruelty of her attack was such that Prez suffered a cardiac arrest, according to prosecutor Mara Isabel Snchez, who described it as an act of inhuman sexual aggression. Following their assault, the assailants washed the 16-year-old in an attempt to erase forensic evidence and took her to a nearby hospital, where she died shortly after arrival from internal injuries sustained during her rape. I know its not very professional to say this, but Im a mother and a women, and though Ive seen thousands of cases in my career, Ive never seen anything like this, prosecutor Snchez told local media. But Prezs murder is just the latest in a harrowing sequence of femicides, crimes usually committed by husbands, boyfriends, family members or acquaintances of the victim. In more than one case, the women has been set on fire by her partner.     Hundreds of people took part in the Ni Una Menos march in Santiago, Chile. Photograph: Claudio Reyes/AFP/Getty Images    The unrelenting series of killings led Michelle Bachelet, president ofneighbouring Chile, to post a video on Twitter saying that similar cases ofviolence in her own country have led me to join Ni Una Menos, the socialmovement born in Argentina, which expresses the frustration felt by our owncompatriots at the cases of violence against women and girls. Every 30 hours in Argentina a women is killed in such crimes, according to statistics kept by La Casa del Encuentro, an NGO that helps female victims of violence."
"8""On the afternoon of 19 October, Claudia Arias and her aunt Susana Ortiz made their way to the centre of Mendoza, where they joined a crowd of thousands who had gathered to protest against a wave of violent attacks on women in Argentina. It was one of half a dozen demonstrations across the country, organised on social media by a loose collective of activists and journalists after the rape and murder of a 16-year old schoolgirl, Luca Prez, in the coastal city of Mar del Plata. Their message was #NiUnaMenos, which literally translates as not one less, but signifies not one more women lost to violence, often committed by victims husbands, partners or close friends.   Related: Why the #NiUnaMenos marchers are demanding a better Argentina for women | Soledad Vallejos    Four days after Arias and Ortiz protested in Mendoza, they were stabbed to death at their home along with Ariass 90-year old grandmother, Vicenta Daz. Police arrested Ariass ex-partner, Daniel Zalazar, a 30-year-old taekwondo instructor. Prosecutors say he murdered the women after an argument over the paternity of Ariass seven-month-old daughter, Mia.  Zalazar also allegedly stabbed the baby and Ariass 11-year-old son, Lucas, both of whom remain in critical condition at a Mendoza hospital. Ariass younger son, Bautista, managed to escape from the house and hid in the boot of a car with his dog, Coco, police said on Wednesday. Officers said it took the eight-year-old several hours to reopen the boot from the inside and then call the police. It was a massacre, Claudias father, Rolo Arias, told reporters. We went to protest at the #NiUnaMenos marches  and then it was our turn. Zalazar was held after showing up at a nearby hospital asking to be treated for wounds he claimed he had sustained in a holdup attempt. He is facing charges of murder and gender violence.   Map   Seven out of the top 10 countries for female murder rates are in Latin America. And although Argentina does not head the list, almost daily reports of male violence against women have provoked deep soul-searching in the country. Four years ago, congress passed a law defining domestic violence, gender-based killings and other categories of hate crimes against women as femicide. But activists argue that Argentina needs to change more than its legislation.  The reason [for these attacks] is Argentinas macho culture, said Fabiana Tuez, director of Casa del Encuentro, a shelter for abused women in Buenos Aires.Machismo runs deeps in Argentina, and manifests itself daily on any city street. Directing flirtatious comments  known as piropos  at passing women is considered an art form by many men, although it often consists of little more than crude catcalls and aggressive propositioning. Even the president, Mauricio Macri, has defended the practice. Deep inside, all women like to hear a piropo, even women who say they dont, Macri said in a radio interview in 2014 when he was mayor of Buenos Aires. I dont believe them. There cant be anything nicer than being told how pretty you are, even if it comes along with vulgarity, like being told what a nice ass you have. Human rights campaigners argue that such behaviour is symptomatic of a culture that refuses to see women as worthy of respect. Theres always been violence against women in Argentina, but weve noticed that its been getting worse lately, said Sabrina Cartabia, one of the organisers of last weeks protests. Cartabia believes the increasingly violent attacks can be seen as a crude response to recent gains made by women in Argentinian society, such as laws reserving 30% of elected positions for women. There are now more female university students than males  and statistics show they perform better academically.  The violence is a reaction that wants to put us back into a traditional role where we dont fit any more, Cartabia said.     Claudio Arias, right, with her ex-partner Daniel Zalazar, who was arrested over her murder and the killing of her aunt Susana Ortiz. Photograph: Courtesy of Clarin    News reports of the Mendoza killings stirred a terrible sense of deja vu for Jimena Aduriz. In 2013 her 16-year-old daughter, Angeles Rawson, was abducted as she returned to her apartment from a nearby gym class in the Colegiales neighbourhood of Buenos Aires. Her body was later found at a recycling centre, wrapped in a garbage bag. Last year Rawsons attacker, Jorge Mangeri, a caretaker, was sentenced to life imprisonment after one of the first convictions under the femicide legislation.  Aduriz argues that Argentinians need to reconsider the way they think about such crimes. We have to make people understand that gender violence doesnt start with the first blow, it starts when the man begins to control the women, to mistreat her, humiliate her publicly, to tell her what to wear, she said. Theres a lot of work put into reducing her self-esteem, so by the time the blow arrives the behaviour has been naturalised. Adurizs painful experience has taught her that victims of violence should not be silent. Women suffering gender violence have to speak out, they have to report it, and people who are witnesses to someone suffering must not leave them on their own.   Related: 'We live in constant fear': Argentina's women on marching against violence    Three years after her daughters murder, Aduriz is still struggling with the loss. You have to find some way to give the pain a new meaning with whatever tool you have at hand  your faith, some kind of service, or helping to educate people about this. Aduriz has channeled her pain into volunteer work at the National Council for Women and at the Uguet Mondaca shelter for women in the Buenos Aires suburb of Burzaco. In the media you only hear about the most extreme cases, but the reality is that many lives are being saved thanks to the increasing awareness, she said. I see it at the shelter, many women are now able to escape from abuse and mistreatment thanks to whats now being done. But she admits that sometimes she feels nothing will ever heal the wound. Its a pain that doesnt stop with putting the killer in jail, Aduriz said. Im very religious and I know I will meet my daughter again in heaven, but meanwhile I have to continue my life on earth without her."
"9""A new law designed to cut the high rate of sex-selective abortions in Armenia is inadequate, limiting women reproductive choices and putting lives at risk, according to women rights groups. The ex-Soviet country, with a population of just under 3 million, has the third highest rate of abortion of female foetuses in the world, behind China and Azerbaijan.  In August, the government outlawed sex-selective terminations in response to pressure from the international community and the United Nations Population Fund (Unfpa), which warned of an impending demographic crisis because of the number of foetuses being aborted due to their gender. Since the fall of the Soviet Union rates of sex-selection have risen in Armenia, meaning that while approximately 105 boys were born for every 100 girls (around the natural rate) in 1991, by 2015 the figure had changed to 115 boys for every 100 girls.  Under the new law, a women seeking an abortion must attend a counselling session with her doctor and then wait for three days for the procedure. The government says this is to allow doctors to pass on information about the dangers of abortion. But local women rights activists have criticised the new rules for keeping the burden of choice on the women and warn that, instead of curbing the practice, the law could actually limit access to safe reproductive care and force women into choosing riskier forms of abortion. Ani Jilozian at the women Support Centre in the capital, Yerevan, says the law is a band-aid solution that focuses on reducing sex-selective abortions without addressing the causes: poor socio-economic conditions and patriarchal values. In traditional Armenian families, daughters-in-law move in with their husbands family  [and] the eldest son is the one to care for the parents, says Jilozian. In a country with almost no social security net, this tradition means boys remain the favoured offspring. Soviet legacy Armenias long history of easy access to abortion is one of the legacies of the Soviet Union, which was the first state to legalise the procedure in 1921. A widespread mistrust of contraception means abortion has remained the primary method of birth control. Armenias birthrate has also dropped in the post-Soviet period: at present, 1.5 children are born per family, compared with 2.5 in the 1980s, according to birth registration figures collected by the UNFPA. And if a family plans to have only one or two children, there is more pressure to ensure one of them will be a boy, Jilozian explains. Economic hardship and the arrival by the end of the 1990s of sonogram technology, which can predict a foetuss sex , are also said to be contributing factors to the rise.  Such is the scale of the problem in Gegharkunik, a region in the east of the country, that the women Resource Centre Armenia (WRCA) has instigated a campaign against gender-based violence, which included discussions on sex-selective abortion.  Women they spoke to described the pressure they were under to produce boys. One said that her first child was a daughter, but then she had four abortions before she conceived a son.    Women are going to continue to have sex-selective abortions, but the risk of unsafe abortions is a lot higher'    Another women said she had paid 150,000 drams (260), the average monthly salary in Armenia, for an illegal abortion. The current legal limit for a termination is 12 weeks, after which it is only allowed for certain social reasons, such as if the women was raped or is a single mother. Others claimed doctors asked pregnant women if they wanted to abort their female foetus, and for a fee offered to perform the procedure at home. Jilozian is dubious about whether a law on its own will help women like those the WRCA spoke to in Gegharkunik. Without an overhaul of the patriarchal social structures women are going to continue to have sex-selective abortions at the same rate, but the risk of having unsafe abortions is a lot higher, she argues. Human rights lawyer Gabriel Armas-Cardona is also concerned that the mandatory waiting period in the bill is in contravention of human rights concerning access to healthcare. UNFPA Armenia is adamant that something needs to be done to the point where theyll even tolerate policies that violate human rights, he says. For Lara Aharonian, co-founder of the WRCA, the focus on the abortion procedure is misplaced. She believes sex-selective abortion should be seen as part of a broader problem with gender inequality in Armenia. If you really want to eradicate sex-selective abortion, you go to the core of the problem, she says. How boys and girls are raised differently, the gender roles, breaking gender stereotypes."
"10""Reeling off the winners and categories of the 2016 Golden Probes  a satirical award show applauding the worst of sexism and anti-choice politics  sounds hilarious, until, that is, you remember that these politicians actually determine US laws. Ohios attorney general, Mike Dewine, nabbed the best adaptation of reality award for claiming Planned Parenthood steam-cooked fetuses. Virginia state representative Bob Marshall won the best original science award for declaring that women who have abortions often later give birth to handicapped children. The best acting like you care about women in a non-supportive role gong went to the Republican congressman Steve King of Iowa for claiming that abortion should be illegal because sexual predators can abuse children without people knowing, by aborting the evidence.   Related: Former lawmaker Wendy Davis: 'Trolls want to diminish and sexualize you'    The inaugural Golden Probes, misogynys most glamorous evening, took place last Sunday night in Manhattan. The sneaker-wearing feminist favorite Wendy Davis, the former Daily Show correspondent Jessica Williams and the Orange is the New Black star Lea DeLaria presented awards, while other celebrities  including comedians Sarah Silverman, Samantha Bee and Broad Citys Ilana Glaser and Abbi Jacobson  appeared in recorded videos.  The Golden Probes is just the latest project by Lady Parts Justice (LPJ), an organization created in 2012 aimed at using humor and the internet to fight for reproductive health. LPJ creates and posts funny political videos online, dropping information into popular culture spaces so people can swallow it in a way thats palatable, and feel outraged and motivated, said co-founder Lizz Winstead. Winstead co-created The Daily Show and served as the shows head writer for years, so she knows how to mix politics and pop culture. I think it is really important for us to have fun and to laugh and to point our finger at those that are being absolutely ridiculous, said Amy Hagstrom Miller, founder of Whole womens Health, an organization which runs abortion clinics across the country.  Hagstrom Miller was a presenter at the Golden Probes and sits on the board of LPJs sister organization, Lady Parts Justice League, the educational arm of LPJ.  She led her Texas clinics to the supreme court of the United States, arguing against Texass restrictive HB 2 law  which demanded clinics function like mini hospitals and led to half of the states abortion clinics closing  and won in June.     Ambrosia Parsley and Holly Miranda perform at the Golden Probe awards. Photograph: JP Yim/Getty Images for Lady Parts Justice    Our work is very difficult on the frontlines; were confronted every single day. Sometimes its just absolutely absurd so its fun to step back and laugh at it, said Hagstrom Miller, speaking about LPJ.  LPJ functions in a a kind of USO [United Service Organizations] capacity, said Winstead, by providing support  ranging from odd jobs painting walls and fixing gardens to throwing parties  for abortion clinics around the country.  In Ohio, during the RNC, the group brought in a taco truck to the parking lot of an abortion clinic and hosted a staff party. In Montgomery, Alabama, members worked as clinic escorts helping women pass through lines of activists and also threw clinic workers a party. In Louisville, Kentucky, they hosted a breakfast for workers and held a comedy show. And in Buffalo, New York, they delivered cupcakes to a clinic. Next week theyre off to Fort Worth, Texas, to build a fence for an abortion clinic. The last few years have seen a constant onslaught of laws aimed at restricting abortion access, with 2,000 proposed or passed in state legislatures since 2013, Winstead said. LPJ attempts to highlight the often forgotten work of the states  whether related to shutting down abortion clinics, restrictive voter ID laws or restricting bathroom access to trans people. Most important legislation is coming out of the states and its happening because people dont know how all this anti-choice legislation is drafted, said Winstead. State politicians who make these laws  usually white, cisgender men  often run in elections with low voter turnout and little public interest, allowing them to slip under the radar. Its not people driven by science, facts, constitutional law or even working knowledge of anatomy that are elected, noted Winstead. women healthcare is compromised in order for Republican officeholders to promote their own agenda, said Davis, who founded the political organization Deeds Not Words. She noted that the Texas maternal death rate has doubled in the last five years and that women are self-inducing abortions in higher numbers.  Its a whirlwind of misogyny. We see it on full display in this election, but those of us who have been fighting on behalf of gender equality for this country have been seeing it every day on both local, state and national levels, Davis said. At the Golden Probes, Indianas governor, Mike Pence, might have narrowly missed out on the outstanding underperformance by a politician in a leading role award (that went to Kentucky Governor Matt Bevin, for claiming that the blood of innocents will need to be spilled if Hillary Clinton is elected president), but several high-profile guests said theyd award their own Golden Probe to Pences presidential running mate, Donald Trump. He doesnt say real things. He doesnt form full sentences. And the idea of that is very  Williams, whos currently working on her own show for Comedy Central, trailed off, staring blankly ahead. Hes a sexist, misogynist fucking piece of shit white straight rich guy in a really shitty toupee, said Lea DeLaria, who stars as Big Boo on Orange is the New Black.  How can you make fun of someone for the way they look when they look like him? Unless he transplants his brain into Brad Pitts body, he should shut the fuck up, quipped DeLaria."
"11""Talaq, talaq, talaq: for more than a decade Arshiya feared the words like some dark incantation. When she caught her husband talking online to other women, he would snarl at her: If you interfere too much in my life, Ill give you talaq. Another time she found intimate messages from a lover on his phone. Again, Arshiya says he shouted her down: You doubt me? Ill give you talaq. Frowned upon even by hardline Muslims, and banned in Pakistan, Bangladesh and across the Islamic world, the practice of talaq-ul-bidat  or triple talaq  persists in India, home to the worlds third-largest Muslim population. It grants men the power to dissolve a marriage with a single word, talaq, said three times. Increasingly, the word is emailed or texted.   Related: Blue-eyed tea-seller becomes social media sensation in India and Pakistan    It is a totally unilateral, one-sided, instant form of divorce, and uttered by men, says Zakia Soman, an activist from Gujarat state. The wife need not be present. She need not even be aware. Now Indias supreme court looks set to declare triple talaq, and another law forcing women who re-marry their husbands to first sleep with another man, unconstitutional. Banning the custom would free up to 90 million Muslim women in the country from a potential trapdoor divorce.  But Soman, whose Muslim reform group is fighting the case, wants something even more radical: To tell the ulema [Muslim scholars], and the whole world, that ordinary Muslim women are fully capable of reading the Quran, understanding the Quran, interpreting the Quran  and obtaining justice for themselves. Arshiyas husband did finally try to divorce her. She never even heard him say the words. One day, suddenly, he told me he had given me talaq. He said, I gave it to you four days earlier. I literally begged him, she says. I went down on my knees and said, if you want to have affairs, go, just dont throw me out of the house. Where will I go with my child? I dont have a steady job  what will I do? Because her husband chose an Islamic divorce, rather than one under Indias more progressive secular law, Arshiya was also denied the third of his salary she would be legally due in alimony. The 45-year-old, now working up to 16 hours a day as a teacher in south-west Delhi, is trying to have her husbands divorce overturned, and pursuing him for the meagre compensation Indian courts have carved out for triple talaq victims. She doesnt want to get back together. The legal action is about making a point. I want justice, she says. The question now isnt money. I was not his servant. I was not his slave, who he kept in the house for 12 years and then threw out. In Fatimas case the custom, which scholars trace back to the Quran, had a modern twist: she was informed of her divorce by text message. He just messaged, talaq, talaq talaq. And then he switched off his phone, recalls Mohd, her brother-in-law. Fatima said she was too depressed to speak.   Related: India's comic-book superheroine trains her powers on acid attacks    Her husband was already married when they wed in February  a fact Fatima discovered two weeks after the nuptials. After he sent the divorce text message, and disappeared, he had a friend visit Mohd. He informed us that he had given [Fatima] talaq and left. And if we tried to find him he would tell the police we tried to kidnap him, he says. We dont belong to a middle-class family, and hes financially sound, so for us it was a situation of fear. The friend offered to cut a deal. Pay some money to us and wind it off, Mohd says.  Obviously for us there was no option left. We took 3 lakhs (3680) as a compensation, and promised we wont do any defamation of them, or contact their families and friends. Because he fears that speaking to the Guardian might breach the deal, he asked that neither his, nor his sister-in-laws last names be published. Soman says cases such as these are unremarkable. A national study released last year by her group, the Bharatiya Muslim Mahila Andolan (BMMA), found roughly 1 in 11 Muslim women were survivors of triple talaq  the vast majority receiving no compensation. Bookish and slight, Soman, 51, speaks in long, elegant paragraphs, that rain criticism on Indias clerics like bombs. The reason triple talaq has persisted, she begins, is first and foremost because Indian Muslims are poor, socially backward, economically backward and educationally backward. As a result, there is a stranglehold by patriarchal elements posing as religious leaders. And they have spread rampant misinformation and misunderstanding. Under British colonial rule, Indias various religious groups were permitted to organise their own personal affairs, including marriage and divorce. To this day, Indian law says Muslims can be being governed by the shariah, or Islamic jurisprudence. But the law doesnt state the minimum age of marriage, the procedure for divorce, or polygamy, or the guardianship of children, Soman says. The law just says theyll be governed by sharia. But which sharia? Whose sharia? Male-dominated groups such as the All-India Muslim Personal Law Board (AIMPLB) have filled the gap, pushing an interpretation of the Quran of which Soman is scathing. I doubt theyre capable of understanding the Quranic values of justice, kindness and wisdom, she says. The BMMAs challenge to Muslim divorce laws, and to Indias entire Muslim establishment, is nothing less than this: that she, and any Muslim women, has as much right to interpret the Quran as any cleric or scholar.    The Quran nowhere has any mention of triple talaq.  Zakia Soman, activist     Triple talaq is totally un-Quranic, she says. The Quran nowhere has any mention of it. A Muslim marriage is a social contract and the right to divorce is given to both husband and wife. The women group has already had one major victory this year: winning a case to overturn a ban on women entering the inner sanctum of the 15th century Haji Ali shrine in Mumbai.  Now triple talaq is in its sights, after the Indian supreme court announced last year it would measure a raft of Muslim marriage laws against the Indian constitutions guarantee of gender equality. The AIMPLB, the peak body for Indian Muslims, is bitterly opposed to any change. Its affidavit, filed last month, argued that absent the right of instant divorce, a husband may resort to illegal, criminal ways of murdering or burning [his wife] alive. It has also raised less risible fears of Indias Muslims  still marginalised, 70 years after Partition  being subsumed under a wave of Hindu nationalism, which has swelled in the past decades, and is surging under prime minister Narendra Modi. Indeed, one of the reasons triple talaq has remained legal so long is the fear, propounded by Muslim community leaders, that if the government is allowed to tamper with Islamic personal laws, it might one day scrap them completely, and the majority will swallow you up, says Seema Mustafa, a Muslim journalist and author. Sure enough, as the supreme court has examined triple talaq these past weeks, members of the ruling Hindu nationalist party have raised the prospect of replacing all religious personal laws with a uniform civil code, which some Muslims fear might be Hindu-inflected, and ride roughshod over their beliefs. Soman and the BMMA know this sensitivities well. The group was formed in the embers of the 2002 Gujarat riots, which left 1,000 people, mostly Muslims, dead. They are careful to argue that the alternative to instant divorce should still be Islamic in character: requiring two talaqs, delivered three months apart, and only after negotiation between the couple and their families. Soman is adamant: The Quran insists that if and when divorce happens it has to be just and fair to both parties. It remains to be seen if the supreme court is on her side. But is God? Of course, she says, peering hard over her glasses. God is on the side of those who work hard, those who are truthful, those who are just, and those who are fair."
"12""David Cameron was unequivocal. The military, he said. The military is definitely one sector where I dont see black people represented at the top. That was four years ago, and the former prime minister was talking to me about the sectors of society in which he felt people of African or African Caribbean heritage were most conspicuous by their absence. He had been spot-on in identifying the military; there are very few black faces in the senior ranks. Only 2.4% of officers are from a black or minority ethnic background  and that figure includes recruits from Commonwealth countries. However, he could just as easily have been talking about the civil service, the police or the media and still have been on the money. Six years before that conversation, I launched the Powerlist, an annual publication that profiles some of Britains most influential people of African and African Caribbean heritage. Now, 10 years on, as we publish this years list, we have found that despite some cause for optimism  mostly in the business sector  in many areas the situation is no better than a decade ago, and sometimes worse. Take, for instance, the government. Incredibly, there has never been an MP of African or African Caribbean heritage in the cabinet. The only black cabinet minister was Baroness Amos (a peer) who served in the decision-making body of the executive as secretary of state for international development and leader of the House of Lords between 2003 and 2007. Baroness Scotland, as attorney general, and before her Lord Boateng, as chief secretary to the Treasury, held positions in which the incumbent minister was regularly invited to attend cabinet meetings, but strictly speaking neither of those roles is regarded as being in the cabinet. Today there are no black people in the cabinet. A look at the judiciary shows that 10 years ago Dame Linda Dobbs, who currently chairs the Powerlist judging committee, was the only black high court judge. In 2004, when she was first appointed, she said of the fact that she was the first person of African heritage to fill such a role: I am confident that I am the first of many to come. Sadly, that has not been the case. Not only was she the one black high court judge throughout her tenure, but since Dobbs retired in 2013 there has been a total absence of black judges in the high court. Intriguingly, however, there has been a significant shift in representation on the list from the public to the private sector. There are no official data to back this up, but a look at corporate Britain reveals that the number of black people in senior positions has increased over the years  almost certainly as a result of aggressive diversity programmes instituted by many companies in this sector. In professional services, while the numbers are still far fewer than they ought to be, there are more black partners than ever before. Its the same in law firms: more black partners have come through over the past decade. And in banking, particularly investment banking, there are more black managing directors than ever. But when we look at board representation in FTSE 100 companies  the people who make the most important decisions in these firms  the picture once again turns ugly. There are just two UK-based black people  Dambisa Moyo, at Barclays and at SAB Miller, and Jean Tomlin at Sainsburys  serving on the board of a FTSE 100 firm. Both are non-executives. There are no black c-suite execs (chair, chief executive, chief finance officer etc)  the people who really run the company. In 2007 there were three, two of whom were executive directors. As our list has clearly shown over the years, this is not due to a paucity of talent. Its more to do with a lack of opportunities for that talent to shine, with some of the headhunters who have traditionally filled board vacancies particularly culpable because they simply dont know any black people. But its not all bad news. The one area that seems to have thrived, somewhat ironically given the economic climate of the past decade, is the number of black-owned and run businesses that have come through. Ten years ago we struggled to find successful entrepreneurs. Now young people such as 24-year-old Steven Bartlett, who set up Social Chain, one of the UKs fastest growing social media firms, and former banker Martin Ijaha, the founder and CEO of Neyber, a company that offers affordable loans to company employees, are becoming serious trailblazers in the business sector. And then we have the more established entrepreneurs such as Ric Lewis, whose property investment firm Tristan Capital Partners has 10bn under management, and Tom Ilube, who has set up and sold a number of tech companies. In the arts, Femi Oguns Identity Agency Group has been at the forefront of supplying black British acting talent to Hollywood, Star Wars actor John Boyega being one high-profile success. On Tuesday we celebrate the Powerlists 10th anniversary at the annual influencers dinner, a black-tie event in the City which will feature leading figures in the UKs African and African Caribbean population as well as guests from the US, Africa and the Caribbean. London mayor Sadiq Khan, will deliver the keynote speech. It has become the most prestigious event in the black British calendar. Ten years on, Powerful Media, the company that publishes the list, has added Future Leaders, which profiles 100 of the UKs most talented black students every year and which has become an invaluable resource for our recruitment firm Powerful Personnel. Through it we work with some of the countrys leading firms to assist them in their efforts to recruit the brightest and best, at all grades of seniority, regardless of their ethnicity. Ive always said that we will stop publishing the Powerlist when it is no longer necessary. But given the slow rate of change in so many areas of British life, its arguably needed more now than ever before. Corporates, financiers and entrepreneurs Nathaniel Peat Co-founder/CEO, Gennex, which provides innovative renewable energy products, primarily solar, in Africa and the Caribbean Social entrepreneur and talented businessman from Tottenham, north London, who has won numerous awards for enterprise.     Gina Miller. Photograph: Dylan Martinez/Reuters    Gina Miller Founder, SCMDirect.com, MoneyShe.com, SCM50.com, True and Fair Foundation Formidable investment fund manager with a passion for consumer protection and a legal challenge against Brexit underway. Najoh Tita-Reid VP and country division head for the UK, Bayer Consumer Care Seen as being among the very best strategic players in her business, and tipped to be soon running a major pharmaceutical company. Daniel Taylor Founder/MD, Metro Design He founded his company in 1998 and it remains the largest black-owned firm in its field of commercial design and build. Freddie Achom Founder/chair, investment group Rosemont Group Capital Partners Focused on land and property development with a keen interest in tech investment, Achom is a self-made millionaire.  Alan Smith Global head of risk strategy and senior executive officer of group risk, global risk, HSBC An author as well as a senior financier who has risen within the ranks of the bank for which he has worked for more than 22 years. Netsai Mangwende  Head of finance business partnering, UK and Europe, AIG An inspiring mentor who plays a pivotal role in her companys senior management. Wol Kolade Managing partner, Living Bridge An engineer now responsible for strategic development of his firms 1.6bn assets. Kanya King Chief Executive/founder, Mobo An internationally known entrepreneur, public speaker and music industry innovator. Gary Elden  CEO, SThree Recruitment Having grown up in a south London council estate, he now runs his own company.  Richard Iferenta  Partner, KPMG Passionate about fairness at work and a mentor and coach to BME managers.  Pamela Hutchinson  Head of diversity and inclusion EMEA, Bloomberg A leading talent in inclusion , she has worked for all the biggest names in banking.  Yvonne Ike  Managing director, sub-Saharan Africa (Ex-RSA), Bank of America Merrill Lynch Financial services guru with a specialism in Africa and deep involvement with several development initiatives. Kayode Akinola Director of private equity, KKR At the heart of the new explosion of interest in Africas private equity sector.  Bernard Obika  CEO, Roughton Group An executive in transport and engineering with a key role in advising governments and organisations on infrastructure.  Kola Karim  Group managing director/CEO, Shoreline Energy International Named by Forbes as one of the most powerful men in Africa, he has been at the helm of his firm for nearly two decades.  Tunji Akintokun  Director, Cisco, Africa A proud torch bearer at Rio 2016, he founded a social enterprise scheme to help children into careers in science and technology and was promoted this year to lead Cisco Africa. Arlene Isaacs-Lowe Managing director  head of relationship management EMEA, Moodys One of the most senior female corporate executives in the country since she arrived in London for Moodys in 2015.  Ric Lewis  Founder/chief executive/chair, Tristan Capital Partners London real estate investor who founded his own charity to improve educational prospects for underpriviledged children.  Media, publishing and entertainment     Sir Lenny Henry. Photograph: David M. Benett/Dave Benett/Getty Images    Sir Lenny Henry Actor; writer; campaigner One of the UKs best-known comedy performers and a campaigner for BME diversity in the media. Dr Shirley J Thompson Composer; conductor; Reader in Music, University of Westminster The first European women to compose a symphony in the past 40 years. Femi Oguns  Leading agent and founder of the Identity School of Acting and Identity Agency Group One of Britains leading talent agents, with Hollywood clients including John Boyega. David Oyelowo Actor Star of several high-profile films who helped lead the #oscarssowhite campaign. Marcus Ryder  Executive producer, current affairs, BBC TV executive who spearheaded coverage of the Scottish referendum.  Steve McQueen  Film director Celebrated producer and screenwriter who in 2013 became the first black director to win an Oscar, for 12 Years a Slave. Chiwetel Ejiofor  Actor Nominated for an Oscar for his role as Solomon Northup in 12 Years a Slave.  John Boyega  Actor and producer  Peckham-born Hollywood star who played the lead in JJ Abrams Star Wars reboot.  Sharon Dodua Otoo  Author Winner of the prestigious Ineborg Bachmann prize for German literature. Zadie Smith  Author Critically acclaimed novelist who became an overnight success with White Teeth.  Tandy Anderson Chief executive, Select Model Management Co-founder of groundbreaking modelling agency whose clients include David Gandy. Jamal Edwards Social media and TV entrepreneur Internet mogul who transformed youth broadcasting with YouTube channel SB.TV. Vanessa Kingori  Publisher, British GQ The first and only black publisher at Cond Nast, the glossy publishing house. Idris Elba  Actor Golden Globe winner known for his roles in Luther and The Wire. Pat Younge and Kwadjo Dajan MD and creative director, Sugar Films Veteran TV producers who between them have delivered Strictly, Luther and Dr Who. Anne Mensah  Head of Drama, Sky One of the UKs few black senior TV executives, headhunted from the BBC. Darcus Beese  President, Island Records Maverick who signed a teenage Amy Winehouse and manages US superstars. Wayne Hector  Songwriter Prolific songwriter who penned smashes for One Direction, Donna Summer and Westlife.  Politics, law and religion Sandie Okoro General counsel, HSBC Asset Management Barrister, governor of the Royal Shakespeare Company and on the equality standards panel of the Premier League.  Dr John Sentamu  Archbishop of York Second most senior cleric in the Church of England. Cambridge-educated and anti-violence campaigner. Colin Cook  Senior clerk to chambers, Garden Court Overseeing the practices of 200 barristers, he cares passionately about social justice, and works with young people in his spare time.      Dr John Sentamu. Photograph: Don McPhee for the Guardian    Rev Rose Hudson-Wilkin Chaplain to the speaker of the Commons The first black person to hold the role and conducts parliaments daily services.  Sam Gyimah Parliamentary under secretary of state, Ministry of Justice Recently promoted in Theresa Mays reshuffle, the Surrey Conservative MP began his working life as an investment banker. Walter H White  Partner, McGuire Woods Key figure in efforts to enhance contacts between black Britons and African Americans. Tom Shropshire  Partner, Linklaters One of the UKs leading black business professionals, on government panel looking at the need for diversity in FTSE companies.  Grace Ononiwu OBE Chief crown prosecutor, West Midlands First women and black person to hold the CPS post and was awarded an OBE in 2008. Funke Abimbola  General counsel and company secretary, Roche UK An award-winning lawyer with an industry-leading team in science and healthcare. Joshua Siaw  Partner, White &amp; Case British-Ghanaian who advises governments, corporates and banks on transactions and crossborder project development in Africa. Sandra Wallace Country managing partner, DLA Piper Lawyer who has built up a fine reputation acting on high-level discrimination cases.  Chuka Umunna  Labour MP for Streatham, chair of Vote Leave Watch The former shadow business secretary is tipped as a future Labour leader. Public and third sector Sharon White  Chief executive, Ofcom Former Treasury official who is first black women to hold a senior role in UK media .  Alexander McLean  Founder and director-general, African Prisons Project Grew his charity to a major initiative that changes lives in Kenya and Uganda. Simon Woolley  Co-founder/director, Operation Black Vote A long-time campaigner for racial justice.  Lord Adebowale Chief executive, Turning Point Social enterprise chief, a champion for those affected by poverty, drugs and mental illness.     Rio Ferdinand. Photograph: Matt Alexander/PA    Rio Ferdinand  Philanthropist, football pundit Retired Manchester United player who runs a housing charity in east London.  Beverley De-Gale and Orin Lewis Founders of the ACLT, one of Britains leading blood cancer charities Keep their sons memory alive by raising awareness of stem cell and organ donation. Fiona Bartels-Ellis  Global head of equality, diversity and inclusion, British Council Trustee, supporter and mentor across several diversity and gender enterprises.  Dr Tony Sewell  Author, teacher, lecturer and founder and CEO of Generating Genius. Member, Youth Justice board Academic, social commentator and writer who works with several youth groups.  Patricia Gallan  Assistant commissioner, specialist crime and operations for the Metropolitan police Scots-born and the most senior ethnic minority female police officer. Widely seen as a future commissioner. Seyi Obakin  CEO, Centrepoint Head of the major homelessness charity, he began his working life as an accountant.  Technology Marime Jamme  CEO, Spotone Global Solutions; advisory board member, Data-Pop Alliance Senegal-born businesswomen who helps startups in emerging markets. Tom Ilube  Founder of Crossword Cybersecurity; African Gifted Foundation Cybersecurity expert and educational philanthropist whose schools transform lives in the UK and Africa. Ismail Ahmed  Founder/CEO, WorldRemit Entrepreneur whose firm allows users to send money across the world in seconds. Piers Linney  Technology adviser, Insight Global Technology Fund Former star of BBC 2s Dragons Den, technology mogul and philanthropist. Martin Ijaha  Founder/CEO, Neyber Ex-Goldman Sachs banker whose firm offers an alternative to high borrowing rates. Baroness Oona King Global head of diversity, YouTube Labour peer, broadcaster and writer who recently swapped the Lords for Silicon Valley.     Oona King. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian    Ian Greenstreet  Entrepreneur; founder and chair, Infinity Capital Partners Respected financier whose foreign exchange firm is making waves in the City.  Janet Thomas  Investment banker; founder and CEO, Touch FX MD of Infinity Capital Partners and one of the most respected women in the City. Jacky Wright Vice-president, Microsoft IT Enterprise SES IT executive of over 20 years business experience who campaigns for diversity.  Adrian Joseph Non-executive director, the Home Office  Senior Google executive who leads a taskforce to accelerate racial diversity. Paulette Rowe  Managing director, global payments acceptance, Barclaycard Chair of the Mayors Fund for London and oversees a third of card payments in the UK. Dupsy Abiola  Entrepreneur, lawyer and founder/CEO of Intern Avenue Lawyer whose data-driven enterprise Intern Avenue is opening doors for BME students. Steven Bartlett  Co-founder, Social Chain Manages social media accounts for brands including the BBC and 20th Century Fox. "
"13""The gender pay gap and the gap in the proportion of senior managers who are women have both narrowed but men continue to earn 23% more than women on average, the Workplace Gender Equality Agency has found. The agencys latest annual figures, released on Wednesday, found that women earn 77% of mens average full-time income.  Although the gap has narrowed by 1.6 percentage points, women in full-time work still earn on average $27,000 a year less than men. The figure rises to $93,884 at the top level of management.   Related: Dispelling the myths: why the gender pay gap does not reflect the 'choices' women make    The data covers more than 12,000 employers and four million employees, representing about 40% of employees in Australia. It covers the period from 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016. Industries with the largest gender pay gap were financial and insurance services (33.5%), real estate (29.3%) and construction (28%). Industries with the smallest gap were education (9.4%), wholesale trade (10%), public administration and safety (10.4%). The WGEA director, Libby Lyons, said the data showed women were still under-represented in management and leadership roles.  Theres no question we are seeing movement in the right direction but its still too slow, she said. Lyons told Guardian Australia a recent report by WGEA, the Diversity Council and KPMG found the three causes of the pay gap were: bias and discrimination, including unconscious bias; industry and occupational segregation, with women predominating in lower-paid sectors such as healthcare; and time spent out of the workforce, such as to care for children.   Related: Automation will embed gender inequality at work  unless we fix it now    The WGEA figures show 70.7% of employers have policies to support gender equality, up 4.5 percentage points this year. But only 27% conduct a gender pay gap analysis (up 3 points). Lyons said companies conducting pay analyses had a major impetus to close the gap between men and women, citing the example of the infrastructure company Asciano closing the gap with its competitors on gendered pay within three years. The report found women were under-represented in leadership roles, holding just 16.3% of chief executive and 37.4% of all management roles. The percentage in senior management has risen by 2.4 points to 28.5%. On boards, 24.6% of directors were women. Just 12.7% of boards had gender targets. The reason we dont see more women in management is because three-quarters of all part-time workers are women, Lyons said. And the data says if you want to be manager, youve got to be full-time. Only 6% of managers work part-time. Theres a cultural norm, an acceptance that youve got to be present five days a week to be a manager. Lyons said the better approach was outcomes based  if managers could achieve their set outcomes working three or four days a week, or one day a week at home, it did not matter how many hours or when they worked.   Related: Single women can't afford to live in the city and men can. Is that fair? | Van Badham and Gabrielle Jackson    Of people appointed to management roles in the past year, 42.6% were women, suggesting the gap in senior roles will continue to narrow. I think thats really, really important, Lyons said. What thats telling me is were getting more women into a managerial pipeline.  As they move up, well start to see more in key management including CEO roles."
"14""Liberias president has said Hillary Clintons defeat was a missed opportunity for women around the world, as fears grew that Donald Trumps victory in the US election would damage women lives and political hopes far beyond Americas borders. The shock result dashed hopes that a first female president could serve as a powerful feminist global figurehead, amid growing concerns that a Trump administration could cut aid funds for some of the most vulnerable women in the world.   Related: 12 steps to achieve gender equality in our lifetimes    We are extremely saddened by this missed opportunity on the part of the people of the United States to join smaller democracies in ending the marginalisation of women, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the first women to be elected as head of state in Africa, told BBC television. Multiple allegations of sexual misconduct against Trump, and his lewd comments boasting of assault on leaked footage, are particularly disturbing for campaigners against gender violence.  Trumps victory is a clear message to women around the world that we dont count, that our safety and demands for justice for sexual violence are not important, said Mona Eltahawy, a Cairo-based writer and feminist. When a sexual predator can become president of any country  most of all the most important country in the world  its a green light that women bodies are fair game. In India, activists fighting the countrys endemic violence against women said Trumps victory was devastating because of Americas global leadership role.     Journalist Mona Eltahawy, who says Trumps victory sends a message that women bodies are fair game. Photograph: Brian Ach/Getty Images    It reinforces the belief, which is also there in India, that men can get away with violating women with impunity, said Sonali Khan, country director of the women rights organisation Breakthrough, adding that it sent a dispiriting political message as well.   Related: Hawaii dubbed the 'best state for women's equality' in new study    It is still difficult for a women to hold a position of political power. Hillary Clinton is more qualified; she has experience. Despite that, this decision. I mean it makes you think: was it because shes a women? said Khan. Chinese feminists had been rooting for Clinton, who has occupied a special place in their hearts since giving a famous 1995 speech in Beijing, in which she declared: Human rights are women rights and women rights are human rights. I cannot accept the result. I cannot believe my eyes, said Li Maizi, one of the leading members of Chinas nascent feminist movement.  When Li and four other Chinese campaigners were arrested in Beijing as part of a government crackdown last year, Clinton came to her defence, accusing President Xi Jinping of being shameless for claiming to speak up for gender equality while persecuting feminist activists. She fears Trump is unlikely to fight for feminists in a similar way. I have been in a bad mood for the entire day, Li said. I will carry on using toilet paper with Trumps face on it.      Japanese politician Yuriko Koike. Photograph: Kiyoshi Ota/EPA    In Japan, women had hoped a Clinton victory would boost their efforts to raise the profile of women in politics, still extremely low despite the recent elections of Yuriko Koike as governor of Tokyo and Renh Murata as leader of the countrys main opposition party. Murata, the first women to lead the Democratic party, congratulated Trump on his victory, but added that she hoped he would distance himself from comments made during the campaign and prove that he respected the rights of women and minorities. Mari Miura, a political science professor at Sophia University and a gender equality expert, said she feared Trumps victory could be used as justification for a misogynistic backlash on the other side of the Pacific. If even Clinton, a prominent politician with lots of experience, cant win, then it will send out the message to Japan that it will never have a female prime minister, Miura said.   Related: Japan must embrace womenomics to modernise economy    Women make up fewer than one in 10 MPs in the lower house of Japans parliament and one in five in the upper house. There are just three women in the 20-member cabinet and prime minister Shinz Abe has got off to a slow start with his pledge to fill 30% of public and private sector leadership positions with women by the end of the decade. There are also concerns that a Trump administration might cut aid to some of the most vulnerable women in the world, including those with HIV/Aids and victims of sexual violence. There is increasing recognition that sexual violence in conflict is major issue, and a major part of responding to that is reproductive healthcare including access to abortion, said Heather Barr, senior researcher on women rights at Human Rights Watch. The US has been a major donor for services for women around the world and, in the wake of a campaign that has focused on restricting reproductive freedom, we are concerned about both quantities of aid and restrictions that might be placed on it. Vidhi Doshi in Mumbai, Tom Phillips in Beijing and Justin McCurry in Tokyo contributed to reporting."
"15""Staff at some of Pariss most high-profile political and cultural offices stopped work at 4.34pm on Monday in solidarity with a protest against women being paid less than men.  women rights campaigners at the feminist newsletter Les Glorieuses had urged female workers to down tools from that time. They suggested that doing so until the end of the year  in effect taking 38.2 days off  would highlight the global wage disparity that experts say will not disappear until 2186. From 7 November at 16.34 [and seven seconds] women will be working voluntarily, Les Glorieuses wrote, referencing research that women work for free, compared with men, for a certain time of the year.  The activists had not intended to spark demonstrations with their call to protest, which reached 2 million people through the social media service Thunderclap.    Related: UK women still far adrift on salary and promotion as gender pay gap remains a gulf    However, the idea captured imaginations and sparked spontaneous street rallies. At Place de la Rpublique in central Paris, scores of women turned out, many with placards, to support the protest. At City Hall, Anne Hidalgo, the citys first female mayor, suspended a meeting of the city council at 4.34pm as a show of solidarity. Staff at the Muse dOrsay and several newspapers, including Le Monde, stopped work and gathered for pictures.  The education minister, Najat Belkacem, formerly minister for women rights, backed the strike. The fight for pay equality involves the whole of society. We cannot wait until 2186, she tweeted. Laurence Rossignol, the current women rights minister, welcomed the initiative and said she had no problem with women in her office stopping work to take part in the protest. When women protest, they make visible what is invisible  I support them, she told Le Parisien. The organisation Osez le Fminisme (Dare to be Feminist) has demanded that French companies face fines if they do not respect equal pay laws. There are just under 13.8 million working women in France, making up 48% of the total workforce. Eurostat figures for 2014 show mens salaries are about 15.1% higher than women.  Across Europe, women earn on average 16.1% less than men in equivalent jobs. According to the Equal Pay Portal, the average gender pay gap in the UK fell from 19.3% in 2015 to 18.1% in April 2016. The French protest follows a similar move in Iceland on 24 October, when thousands of women left work at 2.38pm to demonstrate against the 14% wage inequality in the country.   Related: Gender pay gap won't close until 2069, says Deloitte    It is a strong sign and we are joining the protest, said Les Glorieuses. This difference in salaries hides other inequalities. Women also do unpaid work, like household tasks. Les Glorieuses urged all French women to take part in the protest on Monday. We represent almost half of the working population and 52% of the total population. We dont want to wait until 2186 for equal salaries. We do not wish to wait 170 years for this parity. On the groups Facebook page dedicated to the protest, there were calls for nationwide demonstrations including at Place de la Rpublique and in Lyon and Nantes. The group also called for a display of solidarity on social networks. Rebecca Amsellem, 28, the co-founder of Les Glorieuses, said the response had taken her by surprise. Im extremely happy that a lot of people took up this issue and made time to show their support, she told the Guardian. Its good that we are thinking about women rights outside of women Day.  We wanted to raise awareness of the issue of unequal pay in France. Its not about imposing anything on anyone. Its about saying that we want everyone, men, women, CEOs, government people to grasp this subject and do whatever they can at their level. If you dont want to wait 170 years for equal pay, there are a few things you can do. "
"16""Anti-gay laws in Commonwealth countries are totally out of date, highly inappropriate and should be changed, the UKs deputy foreign secretary has said.  Alan Duncan promised MPs the Foreign Office was fighting in every capital in the world to block a surprise African nations-led move at the UN general assembly to end or delay the appointment of a UN expert to champion LGBT rights. Many of the countries trying to block the proposed mandate are Commonwealth members.  The move at the UN was expected to be made either on Tuesday or later in the week, and there had been frustration in the Labour party at the reluctance of the FCO to set out its view in public. Duncan admitted the FCO had been surprised by the sudden move by the African nations, and only became aware of the plan on Friday, but was resisting it.  Duncan, one of the first openly gay Conservative MPs, promised there was a complete starburst of UK diplomatic effort in the FCO to assemble a coalition to defeat the African nations-led move.  Duncan said: All people are born with equal rights and should enjoy the protection of the UN. He said the UK will resist any and all attempts to block the mandate of the new LGBT champion. The UN human rights council voted in June to appoint an independent LGBT expert for the first time to monitor violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity around the world. Prof Vitit Muntarbhorn was handed the role last month and was due to investigate abuse against the global LGBT community.   African nations and some Islamic states said gay rights should not be regarded as a human right, and want his mandate revoked at a meeting of the UN general assembly in a vote scheduled either for Tuesday or Thursday. African nations are also concerned that sexual orientation and gender identity was being given attention to the detriment of issues of paramount importance, such as the right to development and the racism agenda, he said.   Related: African nations attempt to suspend UN's LGBT rights monitor     The push at the UN is being led by Botswana and has the potential to turn into a wider battle over anti-gay laws in the Commonwealth. Although Duncan said the days were over when the UK could instruct Commonwealth nations what laws to adopt, he urged the Commonwealth to stop lagging behind on gay rights. He resisted suggestions that UK aid should be conditional on countries stance on gay rights since that may punish innocent people.   The Labour shadow minister for equality, Sarah Champion, wrote to the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, earlier this week. I am extremely concerned that African nations are now seeking to initially suspend the UNs first independent expert charged with investigating violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity, she wrote.  You will of course understand the strong imperative for such a role to exist and the very real implications for LGBT individuals all over the world who continue to be subject to the most appalling and systemic discrimination, hatred and violence.  According to a UN human rights report last year, at least 76 countries retain laws used to criminalise and target people on the basis of their sexual orientation and gender identity, including laws criminalising consensual same-sex relationships among adults."
"17""The Guardian highlights accusations that the Nicaraguan election was rigged (Report, 8 November), but provides no evidence except for predictable slurs from defeated opposition candidates. A variety of independent opinion polls over the past year have put Daniel Ortega and the FSLN (Sandinista National Liberation Front) at around 60%-65% support, so the actual result is entirely consistent with the polls. You also report suggestions that Ortega used his power over the courts to remove leading opposition candidates, notably Eduardo Montealegre, whose disputed leadership of the PLI (Independent Liberal Party) was overturned by the supreme electoral council in July. The council is an independent body, and is not controlled by Ortega or the FSLN. It acted to restore long-standing PLI politician Pedro Reyes to the leadership, rather than Montealegre, who has spent most of his career as a member and sometime minister for the rival PLC (Constitutional Liberal Party). And the PLIs election result was also better than their opinion poll ratings under Montealegre. Perhaps instead you should be celebrating the success of a leftwing government in a deeply impoverished country that has managed in 10 years to almost double GDP, increase foreign investment by 450%, eliminate illiteracy, cut poverty by nearly 40%, massively increase its renewable energy generation, abolish fees for health and education, create the safest environment in Latin America, and which, according to the World Economic Forum, is 10th in the world in terms of gender equality.James PokeDorking, Surrey  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com"
"18""A campaign to push for abortion to be removed from the justice statutes and decriminalised is to be launched this month by the countrys newest political party. Sophie Walker, leader of the non-partisan women Equality party, said it was time that abortion was made a sexual health and human rights issue, rather than left languishing under Victorian criminal law, where a life prison sentence still exists for procuring a termination. This is a flagship policy for the party, which will hold its first conference in Manchester next weekend. It hopes that with pressure from its supporters, other political parties will take up the issue. The current legislation governing abortion is the 1861 Offences Against the Person Act, which came into force decades before women had the vote.   Related: Northern Ireland women takes NHS to court over abortion law    Abortion is part of life in mainland Britain: one in three women will have an abortion before the age of 45, with the highest rate among 21-year-olds. Rates have remained fairly constant over the past few years, higher in England and Wales than in Scotland, with 197,906 Britons and 5,190 non-British residents having an abortion last year. About 98%&#xa0;are NHS-funded and the vast majority, 80%, carried out at less than 10 weeks pregnant. Under the 1861 act, and as amended by the Abortion Act 1967, abortion remains a criminal offence; only cases that meet certain caveats are exempt from prosecution. Two doctors must sign to confirm that a womens or her unborn childs health and welfare is at risk, resulting, say campaigners, in the law simply being circumvented in many cases. And it is also open to political interference. The British Pregnancy Advisory Service believes the rules work only because health professionals work around them. The WE party has grown to more than 65,000 members and 65 regional groups since its inception last year. It fielded its first political candidates at local and regional elections this year, including for the London mayor. This is really about making it very clear that women healthcare rights are human rights, said Walker. That is why we want to debate this motion at our first conference and to put a focus on prioritising and funding sexual health and wellbeing. If you are denied control over your own body then you are denied so many other controls over your life. Any denial of reproductive rights is a form of violence against women, and the massive funding cuts ongoing in the UK are part of a real trend that is de-prioritising equality.   Related: Three in five people in Northern Ireland want abortion decriminalised    Former Progressive Unionist party leader Dawn Purvis is on the advisory board of Marie Stopes International, which provides contraception and safe abortion services. She is to give a keynote speech at the WE party conference on the position in Northern Ireland, where several prosecutions are under way of women who have used the so-called abortion pill. The situation in Northern Ireland is different to mainland Britain in that, basically, a women has to be about to die before she is allowed a termination, Purvis said. Rape or incest or foetal abnormality are not circumstances under which an abortion will be allowed. Were seeing women being prosecuted and convicted as criminals  one was reported by her GP after she had gone to him for help, another is a women being prosecuted for helping her daughter. But thankfully we are seeing more and more legal challenges  late last year we had a ruling that the stance of the Ministry of Justice was incompatible with international standards on human rights. Diana Johnson, Labour MP for Kingston upon Hull North, has tabled a 10-minute bill for the spring when she will also raise the issue of decriminalising abortion. She does not want to change time limits but wants medical procedures to be governed by clinicians, rather than the criminal law. That any women procuring an abortion is potentially facing a prison sentence of life under legislation dating from 1861 is patently something that needs looking at carefully, she said. Decriminalising abortion, for both health professionals and for women, would put the issue with clinicians and health experts, where it belongs."
"19""A Canadian mother has called for lawyers and judges to receive better training on gender identity after two judges in the province of Alberta ordered her four-year-old child to stop wearing girls clothing in public. The order was first issued last year by a family court judge in the city of Medicine Hat. Three months later, the clothing restriction was upheld by a second judge.  Susan Smith, whose name has been changed to protect her child, said she gave birth to a male but the child began identifying as a girl soon after turning two. First I thought it was really cute. It was like, oh no no honey, youre a boy. But her child became increasingly insistent. Smith, who is separated from the childs father but shares custody, said she struggled with how to respond. I was kind of questioning, is my kid doing this for attention? What is going on? Then one evening, after her child surprised her by asking when their penis would fall off, Smith sat the child down. I told them, Sweetheart, you were born with a penis, so youre a boy. You will always have your penis, therefore youll always be a boy.  A few nights later her child woke her up, visibly upset. It was along the lines of Mom, I dont want to be a boy, said Smith. And then it went to almost shouting: Im going to cut my penis off, I want my penis off.    Related: 'Crucial' study of transgender children links mental health with family support    Concerned for the safety of the child, she sought professional help and began researching gender dysphoria, a condition that causes a person to experience extreme distress because of a disconnect between their birth sex and gender identity.  Soon after, Smith decided she would acknowledge the childs choice of gender identity. I was going to do whatever I could to validate and support them and to be that one person they could go to, Smith said. After talking to the staff and children at her childs preschool and daycare, she began offering the option of wearing either male, female or gender neutral clothing. Her child consistently chose stereotypically female clothing and opted to go by a female name, she said.  According to Smith, her childs confidence bloomed, and the yelling, screaming and unhappiness disappeared. Everything was perfect, she said.  Throughout the process, Smith had kept the father informed. But about one month after she began allowing her child to choose their clothing, Smith was served court documents. The father  who Smith said blamed her for the childs anxiety and confusion around gender  was seeking full custody of the child.  The first interim order, issued in December 2015, said Smith could continue as the primary caregiver. But the judge said the child would not be permitted to wear clearly female clothing in public. The child could choose to do so in private, the order said.  The ruling came as a shock to Smith. Im the person that knows this kid more than anybody in this world, she said. Its like telling your kid who has a huge thing for being Spiderman  and that was allowed to have a Spiderman backpack, a Spiderman shirt, a Spiderman pencil and a Spiderman cup  and all of a sudden you come along and you take all of that away. And you give them a Batman cup. In February, a second judge upheld the ruling, and granted the father primary custody of the child, with Smith allowed limited access. In September, a third provincial judge overturned the clothing restriction after consulting with a parenting expert. The child, said the judge, must be provided with male and female clothing and be allowed to choose what to wear.   Smith said the orders  all issued within a nine-month span  had taken a toll on the child, who is now five. When my child was removed and placed with Dad, they internalised it and took it like they did something wrong. They were being bad because the judge doesnt like them to be a girl. She said she planned to file a judicial complaint with the province, demanding that all legal representatives in Alberta  from judges to lawyers  be better trained on gender identity. If they were properly educated and aware of the severe consequences and the turmoil this has had on my child, they could not ethically say its in the best interests of the child.  Ron Hewitt, the executive director of Albertas provincial court system, said judges studied and referred to a number of sources of information to keep up-to-date on the law and other matters that applied to their role. Our court carries on extensive professional development for the judges of the court in all areas as appropriate, he said.   Related: Transgender children: the parents and doctors on the frontline    Albertas justice minister, Kathleen Ganley, said she could not comment on the specifics of the case, but referred to an amendment made last autumn to the provinces Human Rights Act, which added gender identity and gender expression as prohibited grounds of discrimination. This is now law, and we expect all Albertans to follow the law, she said in a statement.  Smith said her complaint  and her call for training  will do little to help in her ongoing court battle to regain custody of her child. But she hoped it would prevent other families going through the same experience.  This has been so hard on my kid, she said, her voice shaking. My kid then started talking about dying. At four, they didnt feel that the world wanted them to be a girl. That they were no good. My kid was asking me, Mom, does it hurt to die? How can I die, where would I go when I die? Mom, now that you know, when I die, grow me in your belly but grow me as a girl, not with a penis. Because now you know."
"20""Australias sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, has urged women not to despair after the success of the US president-elect, Donald Trump. The lawyer and former commissioner at the Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission has been travelling the country listening to the experiences of women in workplaces, in rural areas and other communities since being appointed to the sex discrimination commissioner role in February.   Related: Kate Jenkins appointed Australia's sex discrimination commissioner    She said while Trumps victory last week meant women must continue to speak out, it was more important than ever that women with disabilities, those living in rural areas, migrant women and women of lower socioeconomic status be given a platform. Certainly we are seeing women in leadership speaking out, and speaking out about the lack of women on boards and in politics and those positions, Jenkins told Guardian Australia. Lots of people are focusing on these issues and the voices behind those issues has momentum. But I think the next step is recognising that women are not one big group. The next step forward will involve the better understanding of the challenges women with disabilities have, the particular challenges rural and remote women have and the unique challenges Aboriginal women face.  The interventions we are working towards might not go far enough to help those groups. I feel I must not speak for those women but in fact help their voices get into the right places. What had troubled many women about Trumps victory, she said, is that it echoed their own experiences of being passed over for positions despite having more credentials, qualifications and experience than their male counterparts. For many, she said it might feel like the momentum gained through calling out sexism and standing up to inequality had been tapered by the reality of how far women have to go. This is a reason why people might be disillusioned, Jenkins said. We know that Trump will be president but I would urge women not to despair. Women do have a voice and its important that all their good work continues.  We have struggled with getting more women into political leadership roles so there is a long way to go and there are some really discriminatory attitudes held by Australians and by people all over the world about the role of women. But my reflective view is that, while gender might have been a factor in Trumps election, theres a whole lot of factors in the result. And Id be worried if people threw their hands up in despair at this because we must not lose sight of the progress that has been made. Later this month Jenkins will present the keynote speech, We Can + We Will, at the inaugural Breakthrough conference in Melbourne, a two-day gender quality event led by the Victorian women Trust. Her address will focus on her major priority areas: preventing violence against women, advancing economic security for women and women in leadership. It is by and large women that are paying the price and suffering much more because of gendered violence, she said.    Related: Bondi Hipsters take aim at Australia's first male-only co-working space    They are retiring with half the savings of a man and even without taking a break for children they earn $700,000 less over the course of their lifetime. Women accumulate poverty over their lifetime and it starts with people telling them not to go into male-dominated fields. She said that every time she heard women experiences of being affected by inequality, or of their disillusionment at the elevation of people like Trump, she became so much more focused and so much more determined on making sure we do better.  It really reinforces that women are paying the price just for being a women, she said. It drives me to think, What can I do in this role and with my skills to change this story?   Kate Jenkins will deliver the Breakthrough keynote on 26 November and will also take part in a workshop on reforming the law to advance women rights. The author of this piece will also speak at Breakthrough on sexual harassment and violence in workplaces."
"21""The line to get in stretched around the block and deep into a hotel parking lot. Thousands of people had turned up to an election campaign event in Medicine Hat, a small Albertan city in Canadas conservative heartland, hoping to catch a glimpse of Justin Trudeau.    Related: Think Canada is a progressive paradise? Thats mooseshit    About 800 of them made it inside, cheering wildly as Trudeau spoke of first visiting the city with his father when he was just seven months old. Later, the Liberal party leader waded into the crowd outside, shaking hands and snapping selfies with admirers among the 1,600 or so people who had teemed around loudspeakers to hear his speech. The boisterous welcome came not during the election campaign which swept Trudeau to power, nor during the heady days after he assumed office 12 months ago  it took place during a local byelection last month, and offers a snapshot of an extraordinary political honeymoon that has come to define Trudeaus first year in office. This is really uncharted territory, said Nik Nanos of Nanos Research. In my 20 years of experience, no one has had a one-year honeymoon.      Justin Trudeau speaking in Montreal. Photograph: Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images    Others question whether honeymoon is the appropriate word to capture what exactly is going on. Honeymoons last maybe a month or two, maybe three  but not a year. This is something else, said Frank Graves of EKOS Research Associates. Certainly in the time Ive been polling  which is a pretty long time  Ive never seen anything like this.  Friday marks one year since Trudeau took power in Canada. The 44-year-old former high school teacher and snowboarding instructor swept into parliament at the helm of a majority government, after campaigning on an ambitious manifesto which promised to take bold action on climate change, revive the countrys sluggish economy and reset the countrys relationship with indigenous peoples.    This is really uncharted territory. In my 20 years of experience, no one has had a one-year honeymoon  Nik Nanos, public opinion researcher     During the election campaign, his team racked up 219 promises that seemingly offered something for everyone. So far, 34 of these promises have been fulfilled and 64 are in progress. In their first year, the government has unmuzzled government scientists, ended Canadas airstrikes against Isis and brought in 33,239 Syrian refugees, among other actions. It hasnt all been smooth sailing; Trudeau and his government have been disparaged by indigenous people who continue to feel sidelined from decision making and Green voters who wonder why the government has adopted the carbon cutting targets of its predecessors. Revelations of fundraisers offering access to cabinet ministers for up to $1,500 a ticket have sparked questions about government transparency while at a youth labour forum last week, dozens of delegates turned their backs to Trudeau , heckling him to honour his promises on pipelines and tackling youth unemployment.    ina First Nation near Calgary, Alberta.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Justin Trudeau in a ceremonial headdress while visiting the Tsuutina First Nation near Calgary, Alberta. Photograph: Jeff McIntosh/AP    But most see these as small knocks for a government that has political capital to spare. Polls routinely suggest that were an election to be held today, Trudeau and his party would earn an even greater number of seats than the 184 won last year in Canadas 338-seat House of Commons. The reality is that they are very different from the previous government, said Nanos. The Trudeau governments popularity is hard to untangle from the divisiveness that dogged his Conservative predecessor, Stephen Harper, whose government shunned climate change obligations, slashed funding to federal efforts on gender equality and sought to ban women wearing the niqab from participating in citizenship ceremonies.  At the outset of last years election campaign, it was clear voters were looking for change. Many of Trudeaus actions so far  from launching a long-awaited inquiry into the thousands of missing and murdered indigenous women to implementing gender parity in his cabinet  have sought to demonstrate they are enacting the change they promised. Some of Trudeaus strength can also be explained by the weakness of the countrys major opposition parties, said Nanos. The Conservatives and the New Democratic Party are currently both lacking a permanent leader, leaving them struggling to offer a meaningful counterpoint on the right or left.  The Liberals shouldnt be too smug with the very strong numbers because theyre the only game in town right now, said Nanos. Trudeaus political honeymoon, he said, could stretch well into 2017 until the two opposition parties choose new leaders.     Justin Trudeau, who once worked as a snowboarding instructor, boxes at a gym in Toronto.  Photograph: Mark Blinch/Reuters    Trudeaus popularity has endured even as his first nine months in office rank among the House of Commons least productive in more than two decades, according to data compiled by the library of parliament.  His government points to the myriad of consultations underway to explain the slow pace, but Canadians arent necessarily looking for substance at this point, said Darrell Bricker of Ipsos Public Affairs. When we ask people directly: is it more style than substance, they say yes, it is more style than substance, but theyre enjoying the style. Canadians across the country regularly gather to snap selfies with the prime minister while social media gleefully shares photos of a shirtless Trudeau or as he shares an intimate moment with his wife, former television presenter Sophie Grgoire Trudeau.  Hes prime minister selfie, right? Bricker said, referring to the name given to him by his critics. All of that stuff you wouldnt see Harper do  for good or for bad. Its very symbolic of the change.      Justin Trudeau and his wife Sophie, a former television presenter. Photograph: Chris Wattie/Reuters    What emerges is an image of a young, dynamic and transparent government. There is just generally a lightness associated with this government as opposed to what came before it, said Bricker. So if you wanted to change this is a 180-degree change from what existed before.     Were consulting will work for a while  but at some point you've got to come up with some very concrete answers  Frank Graves, political analyst     The hard work starts now, he said. Details must be hashed out on the governments plans to legalise recreational marijuana, reform the countrys electoral system and meet its emission targets. After a year of vague promises to strike a balance between environmental protection, a limping economy and a fraught relationship with Indigenous peoples, Trudeaus government will be forced to put these pledges to the test in imminent decisions on several massive energy projects. Its the first time theyre going to actually have to pick a side, said Bricker.  Its a challenge that may get a boost from an unexpected source: international media. In a country long wary of being overshadowed by its southern neighbour, Trudeau has been wholeheartedly embraced by global media who delight in his feminist views or his take on quantum physics. The international attention has helped propel his popularity at home, said Graves of EKOS Research Associates. I do believe that Canadians, one of the reasons theyre so happy with the government is that they really like the way were being seen on the world stage. Its a sharp contrast to the previous government, he said. Frankly I had data showing that Canadians were ashamed and embarrassed about our image with our performance on things like climate change or our policies on Israel or moving to towards militarism.     Justin Trudeau and Barack Obama at the White House state dinner reception. The pair are seen as in step on key issues. Photograph: Olivier Douliery/EPA    The governments approval rating has persisted even as stagnation and rising inequality has given rise to Canadas worst economic outlook in two decades, said Graves. In some respects hes sort of tapped into the same sentiment that drove Brexit and Trump but with a very different type of message  instead of take back control and close the borders and build walls, lets talk about sunny ways, lets talk about a more optimistic approach.  The government has vowed to counter the slumping economy by pumping billions of dollars into infrastructure. Vowing to restore middle-class progress, theyve raised taxes on the top 1% to help pay for a middle-class tax cut, as well as handed out a means tested universal child benefit. Its an approach that will have to start delivering growth and shared prosperity soon, said Graves, or risk jeopardising the governments unprecedented popularity.  He likened it to the other challenges facing the government as they move into their second year, from democratic renewal to climate change.  These are really daunting challenges. So yeah, were consulting will work for a while  but at some point youve really got to come up with some very concrete and solid answers about how to deal with those tough problems."
"22""After 19 years together, Ins Acevedo and Yolanda Torres finally tied the knot last September, at a collective wedding in the Mexican city of Quertaro. But their marriage was tragically short lived: less than a month later, Torres suffered a fatal heart attack. Her death triggered a period of intense grief for Acevedo  but also the start of a bitter legal battle to have the couples legal rights respected. When Acevedo tried to obtain a certified copy of the marriage licence so she could process her pension, she was told the document didnt exist. Only after a complaint to state human rights officials did the document appear  though the registry director told Acevedes that she was receiving it due to extraordinary circumstances. Same-sex couples have been able to marry in Mexico since 2009, when the countrys capital became the first city in Latin America to pass marriage equality laws. But in recent months, a well-organized and well-funded backlash has emerged, claiming credit for derailing a presidential proposal to entrench marriage equality in the countrys constitution.  Meanwhile, a string of cases like Acevedos suggest that rights for gay people are still treated as exceptions to be granted at the discretion of local officials. And despite a string of court rulings in their favour, gay rights activists now fear that opponents of marriage equality could slow further reforms  or even roll back some of the progress they have achieved.  Were worried, said Mara Fernanda Lpez, a sociologist and LGBT activist in Quertaro. Theyre organized and have economic and political power. Its something that social movements dont have.   Related: Colombia: the next battleground in the global fight for marriage equality    Part of the problem is that marriage equality has never been enshrined in national law and remains subject to a patchwork of overlapping state and federal legislation: it is only explicitly legal in 10 of the countrys 31 states and Mexico City. In 2015, the supreme court ruled that any law restricting marriage to heterosexual couples was discriminatory, meaning that state laws prohibiting same-sex marriage can be successfully circumvented with a court injunction.  Surveys show the country split on same-sex marriage  a poll in the newspaper El Universal showed 49% opposed and 43% in favour  although there is still strong opposition to gay couples adopting children. Opponents appear emboldened, however. A movement known as the National Front for the Family emerged earlier this year after President Enrique Pea Nieto introduced an initiative to legalise marriage equality nationwide, allow all couples to adopt children and to include positive portrayals of the LGBT community in educational materials. The movement against marriage equality  which appears well funded and appears to have the support of politicians across the political spectrum  has since convened more than 100 marches nationwide under the slogan Dont mess with my kids. It has also started collecting signatures for a citizen initiative which would reform the constitution to define marriage as heterosexual.  Rodrigo Ivn Corts, spokesman for the Front and a politician with the Catholic-friendly National Action Party (Pan), said: You can endure and tolerate many things occurring around you  such as corruption  but not when someone messes with the family. Observers say the presidents initiative was the pretext for a series of pro-Catholic organisations  sponsored by big-money backers  to mobilise. These groups came together to take advantage of a weakened president, said a former member of a militant Catholic organisation, who asked that her name be withheld for fear of reprisal. Pea Nietos initiative, she said, awakened the beast.     A couple kiss each other during a march in support of gay marriage, sexual and gender diversity in Mexico City on 11 September 2016. Photograph: Carlos Jasso/Reuters    The campaign was supported by both evangelical Christians and the Catholic church, which regularly lobbies for policy changes on social issues  such as abortion bans  while staying silent on other issues such as drug war violence, which has claimed nearly 200,000 lives. Attacks against the family are much more serious than violence, more serious than narcotics trafficking and more serious than corruption, said Father Hugo Valdemar, archdiocese of Mexico City spokesman. The presidents plan on marriage equality eventually stalled in congress, where members of Pea Nietos own party argued that setting federal policy on same-sex marriages would interfere with states ability to set civil registry rules. Other arguments were more extreme: Edith Martnez, who represents Encuentro Social, a party founded by evangelical Christians, said marriage equality would lead to people marrying dolphins or laptops. The backlash has also been felt at state and local level. It is especially strong outside of the left-leaning capital  something Acevedo experienced first-hand in Quertaro, about 155 miles (250km) north of Mexico City. She and Torres initially requested a marriage licence shortly after the supreme court issued its ruling in July 2015, but were at first rejected.  A second attempt was successful, but when the paperwork reached the state government registry, the marriage was declared invalid because they had failed to secure a court injunction.  The Quertaro state human rights defender subsequently intervened and found four similar situations in which local officials had ignored the supreme court ruling, prompting the registry to reverse its policy. Acevedo is still struggling to claim the spousal benefits of her wifes teachers pension because local officials claim she needs to have been married for at least a year to be awarded them. The time she and Torres lived together does not count, she was told, even though it would do in the case of a heterosexual couple. Theyve pulled this excuse out of their sleeve to deny me a pension, she said. Activists say that episodes like this underline the precarious nature of LGBT rights in Mexico. The issue of marriage equality should be treated as an issue of human rights, Lpez said. But it is often reduced to a question of political will."
"23""Malta has become the first country in Europe to ban gay conversion therapy after the parliament in Valetta unanimously approved a bill outlawing attempts to cure homosexuals of their sexuality. Under the new Affirmation of Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Gender Expression Act, anyone found guilty of trying to change, repress or eliminate a persons sexual orientation, gender identity and/or gender expression will face fines or a jail sentence. Practising medical professionals who prescribe gay cure therapies could face fines of up to 10,000 (8510) and a jail term of up to a year, with lesser fines of 1,000 to 5,000 and shorter sentences available to judges in other cases, Malta Today reported.  The Mediterranean island nation has launched a number of progressive social reforms since its Labour government was elected in 2013, and has twice been named the European country that best respects the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and intersex people by the advocacy group ILGA-Europe. The new law also decrees that no sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression constitutes a disorder, disease or shortcoming of any sort, and lowers to 16 the age at which people can request a change in gender without their parents approval.  Supporters of gay conversion therapy argue it uses common psychological or counselling techniques to help people voluntarily change their sexual orientation, but the practice is widely condemned.  In Britain, the NHS, Royal College of Psychiatrists and all leading counselling and psychotherapy bodies have signed a joint statement describing it as unethical, unscientific and potentially dangerous.  According to the LGBT rights group Stonewall, a 2009 survey of 1,300 mental health professionals in the UK found that more than 200 had offered some form of conversion therapy to patients referred to them by GPs and NHS practices. In the US, where the practice is banned on minors in several states, the American Psychiatric Association has said it opposes any treatment based on the assumption that homosexuality per se is a mental disorder or  that a patient should change his/her homosexual orientation. Professional bodies representing Maltas psychologists, psychiatrists, family therapists and counsellors welcomed the bill barring what they called an inhumane practice, saying in a joint statement that they were very proud to have played an integral part in drafting it.  Gay conversion therapy not only rejects a group of individuals on the basis of unfounded prejudice and lack of tolerance for diversity, but also impinges on the international recognition of LGBTIQ rights, the associations added. As a body we promote respect and equality for all persons, and are determined to continue working towards ensuring our clients can enjoy as safe a therapeutic experience as they deserve, their statement said."
"24""A Conservative MP who faced heavy criticism after claiming that the justice system was skewed to discriminate against men has been elected on to a parliamentary committee that scrutinises issues linked to women rights and equality. Philip Davies, whose claim that feminist zealots really do want women to have their cake and eat it was exposed by the Guardian in August, was elected unopposed to fill a Tory place in the grouping. The decision led to an outcry on Twitter with Sophie Walker, the leader of the women Equality party, one of the first to respond:     I hope Philip Davies plans on bringing feminist cake and eating it. WE are watching. SophieWalker (@SophieRunning) December 13, 2016    Labours outspoken MP renowned for her feminist views, Jess Phillips said: Ill not be standing in the way of it. I have every faith that the intelligence and skills of those on the committee will mean he will have little effect, much like in the rest of his career.  The Labour Party said that select committees were matters for MPs, while Labour MP, Gavin Shuker, announced the news and then added: Just let that sink in for a minute. Others called it a sick joke or another finger up to the people of the country.  One tweeter, known as the secret barrister, pointed out that Davies was a man whose priority was to send more women to prison. Others, who also consider themselves anti-feminist, cheered the outcome.  The MP for Shipley will join a committee chaired by the former women minister and campaigner on equality issues, Maria Miller. The committee is investigating inequalities faced by Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities, ensuring strong equalities after Brexit, disability, women in the House of Commons and employment opportunities for Muslims. "
"25""  One of Chinas most prominent feminists has a message for the US president-elect: Hey Trump, feminists are watching you. Zheng Churan, who has been supported by Hillary Clinton for her advocacy, wrote a letter to Trump warming him of the perils of chauvinism as he prepares to take office.  Trump famously boasted about using his fame to have sex with women and grope them without prior consent, saying: When youre a star they let you do it. In 2015 Zheng was one of five feminist activists detained by police for more than a month after the group planned a peaceful protest against sexual harassment. Zheng, who is also known as Datu or Big Rabbit, wrote to the president-elect: Even across the Pacific, in the faraway land of China, there are constantly reports of you and your governments involvement in sexual discrimination. We wish you to watch out, the feminists worldwide are speaking, and we are watching you. Zheng called on Trump to respect women rights, warning him not to use his position to spread straight-man cancer.    Sent a letter to @realDonaldTrump . 10,899 Chinese vote 10 Top Straight-man-cancer Behaviors.HEY TRUMP , FEMINISTS ARE WATCHING YOU. pic.twitter.com/75eBUxY7tD&mdash;  (@allisongrabbit) December 13, 2016    The term has become popular in China in recent years to describe a disease among narrow-minded men seeking to control women and work against gender equality.  Straight-man cancer also chastises men seen to cling on to traditional Chinese norms in relationships, such as suppressing women rights through official policies, devaluing female labour and branding educated women as unattractive.  In general straight-man cancer is the equivalent of male chauvinist pig in English, Zheng wrote. Just like cancerous cells, straight-man cancer spreads everywhere damaging feminist movements and undermining social equality. It is pervasive. Clinton supported Chinas feminists during their detention, accusing President Xi Jinping of the shameless persecution of women rights activists.    The detention of women&#39;s activists in #China must end. This is inexcusable. #FreeBeijing20Five Read this story: Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) April 7, 2015    Trumps eventual election rival became an icon following a 1995 speech she gave at the UNs Fourth Conference on Women in Beijing. Trumps record of supporting causes of the persecuted is far less clear  and many advocates in China worry his presidency will prioritise deal-making over human rights. Zheng predicted a hard fall if Trumps previous sentiments followed him into the White House. We wish to warn you that those who spread this straight-man cancer will inevitably pay their price for the contemptible comments, violent remarks towards women or actions sexualising women."
"26""I was interested to read about the Institution of Engineering and Technology (Report, 8 December) highlighting the problem of girls not being given toys that might lead to an interest in science and engineering. The&#xa0;report blames the marketing of toys. However, pressures exist elsewhere. As a male former scientist I have made attempts to encourage people to buy toys for girls that are gender neutral, educational and linked to practical exercises. In every case I have been thwarted by various female adults and told for example: She is a girly girl, she must have a pink toy, dress or something relating to cooking. It seems to be the practice in many cultures that the pressure for girls to behave or dress in a certain way or to become a mother comes not from men but from older women. It is they who need to change.Dr Nigel Long Keynsham, Somerset  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"27""Reversals of fortune do not come much sharper or more symbolic than that suffered by Dilma Rousseff over the past year. Last December, she was still in the early stages of her second term as Brazils first women president. Unbeaten in elections, she lived in a palace, commanded Latin Americas biggest bureaucracy, joined summit banquets alongside Barack Obama, Vladimir Putin and Angela Merkel, and went on her morning bicycle ride in Braslia with the full protection given to a head of state.   Related: A warrior to the end: Dilma Rousseff a sinner and saint in impeachment fight    Today, however, after being levered from power by her running mate and impeached by Congress, Rousseff lives in her mothers apartment, buys her own groceries at the local supermarket, has a one-man security detail and rides her bike along the seafront of Rio de Janeiro with the rest of the crowd. There can be few more striking personifications of the demise of the political left in the past 12 months. But even though it may seem that the world has moved backwards in terms of gender, race and income equality, Rousseff  who has arguably lost more than anyone  says that for her, this is by no means rock bottom. Every day has been difficult, she tells the Guardian during an interview near her residence in Rio de Janeiro. But this is not the worst year I have experienced. Not at all. That distinction belongs to the period 1970-1972, when she was imprisoned and tortured for belonging to a clandestine Marxist guerrilla organisation that was committed to overthrowing the military dictatorship. She suffered beatings, electric shocks and other forms of abuse without ever giving up the names of her collaborators. In comparison, she said, even the bleakest moments of the past year have been bearable. Among the worst was on 17 April, when her fate was effectively sealed by a rowdy lower house impeachment vote. Her alleged wrongdoing  window dressing government accounts  was far less severe than the accusations faced by more than 100 of the deputies who rose in judgment against her, but she was damned nonetheless, putting her on a course that later led to her removal from the presidency and the negation of the 54m votes that put her in power. How did she feel that night? Its hard to say. There is such a kaleidoscope of memories, she says, pausing at some length to find the right words, I felt sadness, despair and indignation. Expressions of emotion do not come easily to Rousseff in sharp contrast to her Workers party mentor and predecessor as president, Luiz Incio Lula da Silva. The two of them watched the impeachment vote together on a TV in the presidential palace. While he sobbed, she ordered popcorn. He cried, and he hugged me, and he said to me cry Dilma, cry! But I dont cry when Im moved. Thats not how I am, Rousseff said. Asked if she had always been like that or whether it was a mental hardening that occurred during her torture, the former prisoner pauses again.  I think it goes back to that time. You can break at any moment so you have to keep fooling yourself. You have to keep kidding yourself that its nearly over or else you fold. You tell yourself, its just 10 more minutes. Then, 10 minutes later, you persuade yourself its just another 10.   Related: Dilma Rousseff taunt opens old wounds of dictatorship era's torture in Brazil    Those old scars were reopened during the impeachment debate by ultra-right deputy Jair Bolsonaro, who dedicated his pro-impeachment vote to the military dictatorship  specifically to the army colonel who tortured Rousseff. I was shocked he could say that in congress, she recalls. Bolsonaro, who plans to stand for the presidency himself in 2018, was never punished for his comments  a sign of both the impunity and the conservatism that characterise Brazils congress. Rousseff believes misogyny is partly to blame for her downfall, as well as the election defeat in the United States of Hillary Clinton  who the Brazilian describes as a friend despite our differences. As she has noted on numerous occasions, there are double standards for women politicians, who tend to be called hard rather than strong when they take tough decisions. The fact that I was the first women president was a factor in what happened to me. It is hard to quantify. It wasnt 100% because of that. But it was a component, she says. I think it will be easier for the next women president. Her critics say she brought about her own downfall. Enemies on the right say she ruined the economy (now in its deepest recession for decades). The disaffected on the left believe her budget cuts were a betrayal of her election promises. Many across the political spectrum suspect that she knew about  and politically benefited from  a massive bribery and kickback scheme at the state-run oil giant Petrobras, even if she wasnt directly involved or personally enriched.  Even allies who praise her for being unusually honest and well-intentioned admit she tends to be secretive and a dire communicator. Freed from the responsibility of office, Rousseff is now more loquacious. She appears to be on a mission to clear her name. The senate acknowledged her relatively modest individual guilt by not stripping her of her political rights after ejecting her from office on 30 August. But she wants her side of the story told and  like Lula  has probably granted more interviews in the past few months than in the previous five years. She blames Brazils dire economy on a global storm of falling commodity prices, weakening Chinese demand, a debilitating drought and the after-effects of the 2008 financial crisis.  Behind the political turmoil, she sees a cabal of plotters  led by current president Michel Temer, her former deputy who she says engineered her downfall, and former lower house speaker Eduardo Cunha  who have dragged the traditionally centrist Brazilian Democratic Movement party to the right. Allied to oligarchical interests in the financial sector, she said they turned against her with greater strength after she cut real interest rates for the first time in more than a decade and achieved almost full employment. Complicating the whole situation, she says, is the increasing fragmentation of political parties, which has created a climate for corruption. In the 1990s, thenpresident Fernando Henrique Cardoso needed the support of only three parties to secure a simple majority in congress. In the following decade, Lula had needed eight. By the time Rousseff left office, this had increased to 12.  Its every day. Everything is a negotiation. Its the only way to get power, she said. People say I dont like politics, but that is not true. What I dont like is the buying and selling  Its always existed, but not to this degree. This is somewhat disingenuous. Rousseff was at the apex of this system for close to a decade, first as chief of staff for Lula and then as president. Unlike many of her accusers, she may not have gained personally (as she says, I dont have secret Swiss bank accounts, I didnt rob anything) but she was unwilling or unable to push a meaningful clear-up on her party and coalition allies. Instead, she left prosecutors and the courts to do the job, while focusing her government on its social and political goals. Asked if she regretted winning in 2014  just as this system started to come crashing down along with the economy  Rousseff shakes her head. Not for one moment. If I hadnt won, things would be much worse now. We would already have an austerity and privatisation package like that of [President Mauricio] Macri in Argentina. Although she credits her short-lived second administration for delaying and reducing the impact of the neoliberal tide now sweeping Latin America, she is not optimistic about the near-term prospects for progressive politicians in Brazil or elsewhere. Brexit and the election of Donald Trump are, she says, a cause for wider concerns.   Related: Dilma Rousseff might be gone, but Brazils political crisis certainly isnt | Paulo Pinheiro    With the increase once again of inequality, especially in developed countries, it creates the conditions for disbelief in democracy. If the demands of the population cannot be met by governments, then politics becomes irrelevant. Then, it wont be projects or proposals, or even utopias, that will move people. Instead, people will focus on symbols, slogans and scapegoats. Thats when the right rises and intolerance grows. For most of her life, Rousseff has been fighting these trends. But for now, she plans to step back and study her enemy. Her immediate plan is to research the concept of states of exception  the term coined by Nazi jurist Carl Schmitt to justify dictators who bypass national laws in the name of the public good.  With these justifications creeping back  for example with the Patriot Act in the US, the criminalisation of the poor and the treatment of refugees  Rousseff says the memoirs will have to wait."
"28""The cliched threat to move to Canada because of political unpleasantness in your own country  entirely hypothetical unpleasantness, of course (cough trumpfaragelepen)  often seems empty. Its like a stroppy kid saying hes going to run away from home, to which the standard parental response is: Be my guest. For the British loyalists who fled the US revolution, however, or the tens of thousands of black slaves who travelled via the Underground Railroad, or the roughly same number of conscientious objectors to the Vietnam War in the 1960s and 70s, Canada has long been a place of refuge. Nor is emigrating to Canada just about escape. The countrys particular combination of social tolerance, relative gender equality, collaborative cultural spirit and 4.7 quadrillion trees have attracted global emigres for as long as Canada has been an independent nation. (One hundred and fifty years next 1 July, but you knew that.) Equally cliche, perhaps, would be to suggest that each brings a story. But weve found a handful of genuinely remarkable ones. Chris Michael The athlete Maria Toorpakai, Pakistans top female squash player     Nobody knew that I was a girl ... Maria Toorpakai, who lived as a boy for more than a decade. Photograph: Lorne Bridgman for the Guardian    It doesnt take long to track Maria Toorpakai down in the Toronto financial district club where she now trains. Everyone nods to the squash courts where the 25-year-old has spent the morning. It hasnt always been so easy to find her. In 2007, death threats from the Taliban forced her into hiding. Confined to her home in Pakistans Waziristan region for more than three years, she spent hours each day playing squash in her bedroom, turning the walls into a makeshift court.  Although she was only 16, much of her life had already been spent at war with the entrenched gender roles of her tribal region. Women are considered weak, not smart and [are] confined to four walls, says Toorpakai.  Her first attempt to challenge this idea came at the age of four when she burned all her dresses in the backyard and lopped off her hair with a pair of sewing scissors. She braced herself for her fathers reaction. Rather than him getting angry, he just laughed and said, Your name is Genghis Khan from now on.  For the next eight years she lived outwardly as a boy.  She developed a reputation as tough, challenging boys to fights. And it was when, aged 12, one of these fights landed her in hospital that her father looked to the local sports arena for an outlet for Toorpakais energy. It was there that she fell in love with squash. I just liked the way the kids were playing, everybody was watching them, clapping and theyre jumping, diving, getting the ball  the rackets are so beautiful.    Some of my family and friends, they were kidnapped. Some were killed  Maria Toorpakai     There was a moment when, after years of living as a boy, it seemed as if the jig might be up. Signing up at a squash academy, her father was asked to produce Toorpakais birth certificate. He took a gamble, saying, This is my daughter, actually. The academy owner surprised them with his reaction: He said: Im so happy that finally a girl is playing sports here, and handed her a brand new racquet emblazoned with the name of Jonathon Power, then the worlds top-ranked squash player. Toorpakai spent hours each day on the court. The only female player in the region, she attracted constant scrutiny. She endured leering and bullying, but focused instead on winning tournaments. She climbed to the top of the countrys junior national rankings in 2005  only two years after she first picked up a racquet.  But with success came unwanted attention, and thats when the death threats started. The Taliban was active in the region and she knew the threats couldnt be ignored: Some of my family and friends, they were kidnapped, some were killed. She confined herself at home for safety, but did her best to keep training, pausing only to send emails around the world, offering her services as a coach in exchange for a place where she could train without fear. One of her few replies came from Power, the man whose name was inscribed on her first racket. Retired and teaching squash in Toronto, he told her he had been to Pakistan and offered to help. It was unbelievable to know that someone like Jonathon Power was sending me a message. A world champion.  She landed in Toronto in March 2011. Power met her at the airport. Everyone just received me with so much love. Right away we started playing, figuring out my training schedule. Five years later, Toorpakai is Pakistans top-ranked female squash player.  Off court, Toorpakai now shares a home in Toronto with three friends and relishes a life of squash, cooking and the occasional movie. Out of the whole world, God chose Canada for me, she says. But while Canada is where Toopakai found the freedom to play, shes adamant its Pakistan she represents in competition. Squash  one of her homelands most popular sports  has become a medium through which she can push for change in how women are seen and treated. If I keep playing for Pakistan, then I can inspire many girls, she says. And they can believe in themselves.  Ashifa Kassam The adventurer Graeme Dargo, one of the last Bay Boys     I had visions of fir trees ... Scottish-born Graeme Dargo learned to grade furs and negotiate with trappers. Photograph: Lorne Bridgman for the Guardian    On a February morning in 1981, Graeme Dargo stood in the middle of a frozen lake in northern Saskatchewan watching a three-seater plane take off without him. A suitcase with all of the belongings hed brought with him from Scotland was all that stood between him and the wilderness. He took off and Im going, Holy shit, what have I done? says Dargo. But this was part of the big adventure  exactly what Id expected. Though he didnt know it at the time, Dargo was in the last cohort of a centuries-old tradition: recruiting young Scots to staff the Arctic outposts of the Hudsons Bay Company. Dubbed Bay Boys, these experience-hungry men worked the backbone of stores that supplied Canadas most remote settlements.  Dargo had graduated at 16 in StAndrews  the so-called home of golf  and embarked on life as a butcher. Then at 21, just as he was growing dissatisfied with his job, he saw a newspaper advert for young people to work in a company of adventurers.  I had visions of fir trees and big lakes, and a very nomadic wilderness kind of life, says Dargo. Almost like a tourism ad for the Rockies. The small plane actually deposited Dargo outside the Chipewyan-speaking community of La Loche, Saskatchewan, where  despite never having previously seen a gun  he took up hunting, fishing and trapping with his aboriginal co-workers. At the time, Hudsons Bay  still North Americas oldest company  was the largest purchaser of furs in northern Canada. Dargo would pay a hunter-trapper an advance to cover ammunition, traps and supplies, and the man would return from a season of travelling with large sacks of furs. Dargo learned to grade the furs and negotiate a price.    Maybe this is a Scottish thing, but I took the words civil servant seriously  Graeme Dargo     The European fur ban changed all that. It was devastating to the local communities. Dargo recalls the day an old man entered the store, laden with bags of fur, and Dargo had to tell him they wouldnt buy it. He says, How can I pay my bill, then? How can I feed my family? Oh, it was awful. I felt really badly about that. Meanwhile, he was doing everything he could to become more Canadian. Curling came naturally to him, and he took up ice hockey  despite not knowing how to skate. After clinging to the boards for the first season, Dargo finally got the hang of it and scored a few goals.  All his efforts paid off in the Inuit hamlet of Kimmirut, when a judge brought him in front of the community and naturalised him as a Canadian citizen. After nine years with the Hudsons Bay, Dargo joined the territorial government and embarked on a career that saw him become a deputy minister within just 10 years. Maybe this is a Scottish thing, but I took the words civil servant seriously, he says. Still, I was also an entrepreneur by nature. He now works with a gold mining company to help prepare indigenous people to share in the employment benefits of development on their land. After 35 years in Canada, Dargo is a northern man, but Scotland still has a place in his heart. This week, Im on vacation pursuing a traditional Scottish activity on the land: chasing a little white ball, he says. Some things we dont lose. Jessa Gamble The pop star Meg Remy, aka US Girls     I grew up with guns, so it all felt familiar ... Meg Remy. Photograph: Colin Medley    In the spring of 2010, Meg Remy  now better known as the solo artist US Girls was living in Philadelphia and anxious for a change of scenery. In the barely post-recession climate, Remy could already see the seeds of Trumpism. I could feel it coming on, and I knew I wanted to go. Something like fate intervened when she was invited to perform a gig in Halifax, Nova Scotia, though she nearly didnt go. Thank God I did, she says. I walked into the club and Max [Turnbull, the pop psych musician who performs as Slim Twig] was performing. For six months afterwards, they kept up a long-distance relationship. But we knew it was right and we didnt mess around. That fall, she wrangled an artist residency at Gibraltar Point, on bucolic Toronto Island. It was amazing to be on this island where you could see the city, but you were removed from it. I was blown away that that place even existed. On Boxing Day she made Toronto her permanent home. Beyond love, Remys decision to relocate north rests on the classic trifecta of Canadian qualities: gunlessness, healthcare and arts grants. On guns: In Chicago, a pregnant 21-year-old women was shot in the back of the head outside my front door, dying instantly in her pink velour track suit. And one time in Philly, I was at Kinkos making copies and some guy came in to fax something. When it came time to pay, he pulled a gun and was like, Im not paying. Then he walked out. It was for $1.70 or something. But I grew up with guns, so it all felt familiar. On health care: I would meet people from Canada and be like, So you can go to the doctor? Oh my God, thats so civilised. When people in a society accept that, it comes with a whole lot of other stuff. Because that means that you fundamentally care about other people. It seeps into all other areas. On grants: When I started getting interested in making videos, I got a Toronto Arts Council grant to make a short film. I had an idea, but didnt have the money. I submitted my proposal and got it, which was pretty amazing because I wasnt someone with a film career or anything. I was just a person with a good idea.    I would meet people from Canada and be like, So you can go to the doctor? That's so civilised'  Meg Remy     Canada had another curious influence: the experimentalism of her earlier musical recordings gave way to overt nods to midcentury American pop classicism. US Girls began to embrace the sounds of Motown and girl groups, albeit refracted through a sensibility that brought to mind David Lynch, Cindy Sherman and Mike Kelley.  A case of clarity through distance, perhaps. But this shift in her musical identity also fits with the argument made by John Murray Gibbon in his 1938 book Canadian Mosaic. Gibbon wrote about how nurturing cultural differences could be done in service of the federal whole  thereby laying the conceptual groundwork for the future adoption of multiculturalism as government policy under Pierre Trudeau in the 1970s. The idea contrasted with the much ballyhooed ideal of American assimilationism, the so-called melting pot  so by this measure, in being more American in her music, Remy is paradoxically being more Canadian. Her move to Canada has also opened her up to more collaborative ways of making music. Her sound today, she says, is the result of falling in with a like-minded crowd. They were so in line with my taste and so willing to help me, that it was just a weird freak thing. Now Im making a modest living off of music, and I owe that hugely to all the people Ive worked with in Toronto. Her last record, Half Free, was shortlisted for the 2016 Polaris prize, and her next  with Toronto collective the Cosmic Range  is set for a 2017 release. Soon after that, if all goes to plan, the US Girl will officially become the most unlikely of things: a Canadian. Daniel Vila The police officer Garry Woods, ex-Royal Ulster Constabulary     Policing in Northern Ireland was more like being a solider ... Garry Woods. Photograph: Colin Way for the Guardian    As the son of a police officer during the Troubles, Garry Woodss childhood in Belfast wasnt exactly carefree. He had certain privileges  a good school, a nice home  but with them came a life of constant vigilance. I wasnt allowed to go near our car until my dad had checked it first, he says. I couldnt answer the front door. I couldnt tell anyone what my dad did for a job. But when youve never known anything else, thats normal. Thats one reason why, after university, he decided to follow in his fathers footsteps by joining the Royal Ulster Constabulary. Youd put on the uniform and be a target, he says. But I wasnt scared. It was exciting, in a perverse kind of way. He served for 14 years. After the end of the Troubles, however, Northern Ireland didnt need as many police officers. Many were directed toward retraining and transfer programs, and one day Woods attended a seminar selling the dream of Canada.     My 'normal' was a heightened state of alert  Garry Woods     Woods didnt fall for the promises, which included big jobs in major cities, but it did sow that seed of curiosity, he says. In 2003, he went on a holiday to Toronto, followed by a separate visit to Calgary - where he walked into police headquarters and asked for a job. I loved Calgary, still do, he says. I love the big sky. The sun was shining the entire 10 days I was here, and people were so friendly and helpful. Woods was, in fact, part of a wave of immigrants hired in the early 2000s by the Calgary Police Service to help deal with the citys booming population. Calgary poached more than 120 officers from Britain, which was targeted for its common language and similar training. Policing in Canada was a revelation. For a long time, Northern Ireland was the most dangerous country in the world to be a police officer. Policing there was more like being a soldier, he says. In some of the areas we went to calls with a minimum of eight police officers. We had soldiers backing us up on every call. Checking under my car for explosives, being armed 24/7, not telling anyone what I did for a living ... My normal was a heightened state of alert. On one of his first days with the Calgary Police Service, colleagues offered to drive him through the citys roughest neighbourhood. They drove and drove. Finally Woods asked when they were going to get there. Weve already gone through it, they told me. And I thought, thats the worst theyve got? Thats not that bad at all. Woods is now a constable on the diversity resource team, building relationships with Latin American and Caribbean cultural groups, and giving presentations to new immigrants like he once was - talking to them about Canadian law, driving, domestic violence, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and other aspects of life in their new country. These are people who may have had negative experiences in their former country with the police, he says. Im here to show them that a police officer is just another person. Shelley Boettcher The advocate Tima Kurdi, the aunt of Alan Kurdi     Here, you have a voice, people will listen  Tima Kurdi. Photograph: Tyler Stiem for the Guardian    When Tima Kurdi first arrived in Vancouver in 1992, a time in her life that now seems impossibly remote, she was confused: where were all the Canadian people? She had moved from Syria to be with her new husband, and everywhere she looked  around their apartment complex, at the printing press where she worked nights she saw immigrants like herself. Her boss at the printing company was the first white Canadian she got to know. She said to me, Im going to teach you 10 words of English per night. Their friendship was a revelation: they shopped together, got to know one anothers family. I felt welcome. You can be yourself [here]. No one will impose You must be this kind of Canadian on you.        video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    Newcomer Kitchen: how Syrian refugees took over a Toronto restaurant    Such openness reminded Kurdi of Damascus, where her large, tight-knit Muslim family had belonged to the Syrian capitals multicultural middle class, and had lived side by side with Christians, Jews and Muslims from different sects. We knew their culture, they knew our culture  everyone was different and it didnt matter. It was beautiful. Even years later, when she was well-established as a hair stylist in the quiet suburb of Port Coquitlam and was raising a son  He speaks English, Arabic and Kurdish: a good Canadian boy  she still talked to her family in Syria nearly every day, and missed Damascuss lively social life. It was on a visit back there in 2011 that Kurdi first saw news of the clashes between protesters and the Syrian government on TV. At first, she says, no one was taking it too seriously. When checkpoints sprang up around the city, Kurdi started to worry  but she returned home to Canada as scheduled. Then all of a sudden  boom. My relatives started to witness terrible things. The civil war broke out in earnest. Her brothers and sisters soon fled to Kobani, near the Turkish border, then to Turkey itself. From Canada, Kurdi helped as best she could. She secured them places to live in Istanbul, away from the refugee camps, and subsidised their rents. In 2014 she visited, and was disturbed by what she saw. Her 13-year-old nephew, instead of going to school, was working 12-hour days at a garment factory. In Istanbul she went door to door collecting blankets and clothes  her brothers and sisters were too proud, and too embarrassed, to ask for help from the local people. On her return to Kurdi was determined to bring her family to Vancouver, but the Conservative government of Stephen Harper had set strict quotas on refugees. So in 2015, she helped pay for smugglers to take her family across the water to Europe. On 2 September, the inflatable boat they were travelling in capsized.    Alan's father said: 'Tima, maybe the picture of my boy is a wakeup call to the world  Tima Kurdi     Kurdis three-year-old nephew Alan, his five-year-old brother Ghalib, and their mother, Rehanna, all drowned. Alans tiny body washed up on a Turkish beach  a photograph that galvanised international opinion around the refugee crisis. In Vancouver, a devastated Kurdi addressed reporters outside her home, pleading in a raw stream of consciousness for an end to the war. She barely looked at the cameras. I felt like I was on trial because I couldnt help them, Kurdi says. But her brother Abdullah  Alans father  encouraged her to keep talking: Tima, maybe the picture of my boy is a wakeup call to the world. So I decided to speak up for all refugees. Kurdi has since addressed the EU Parliament, met with UN officials and heads of state and delivered public talks. It hasnt been easy. The crisis, still with no end in sight, weighs heavily on her. She opened her own hair salon in Vancouver earlier this year, but admits shes no longer as passionate about her work as she used to be. When it comes to her advocacy for migrants, Kurdi says that being from Canada has helped: Here, you have a voice, people will listen. She believes the country is rediscovering its heritage as a place of refuge, especially since the election of prime minister Justin Trudeau, who honoured his campaign promise to admit 25,000 Syrian refugees. But she still thinks the government could do more. In Canada, we are showing the world. The majority of Canadians have opened their hearts to the refugees. Here, you are allowed to keep your culture and still be Canadian. It reminds me of the Syria I remember. Tyler Stiem The charity worker Uriel Jelin, Jewish-Argentinian leadership trainer   s Jewish community centre.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"669\" class=\"gu-image\" />  The door that opened the most warmly was Winnipeg ... Uriel Jelin at the citys Jewish community centre. Photograph: Ian McCausland for the Guardian    As a middle-class professional living in Buenos Aires, Uriel Jelin, 39, felt he had to adapt to the levels of crime in Argentinas capital. We lived in a nice neighbourhood. And some nights we put the chair against the door. In 2015, he and his wife, Cynthia Fidel, decided theyd had enough of the political instability and institutional decay in Argentina, which had not recovered fully from its 2001 economic crisis when it lurched into a new one. So they left their coastal city of more than 3 million for the landlocked prairie city of Winnipeg, home to around 720,000 people. On the first night in our apartment, we looked at the lock and said, This is a joke. This is not a real lock. And I was tempted to put the chair against the door, Jelin recalls. People said to me, Where are you going? Winnipeg? Such a boring place. And I said Yes, thats what we want. We want a place where it isnt dangerous to go outside. They arent alone. Over the past decade and a half, a steady exodus of professionals (Jelin and Fidel are administrators for charity organisation) have left Argentina. Hundreds  most of them Jewish  chose to settle in Winnipeg, Manitoba, the first Canadian province to set up an immigration program of its own to run alongside the national system. About 15,000 people a year arrive under the provincial nominee programme. The door that opened most warmly  the most welcoming  was Winnipeg, Jelin says. The local Jewish community was especially supportive, sensitive to a disturbing undercurrent of antisemitism that Jelin describes as pervasive within Argentinas police and armed forces.  So in February 2015, Jelin, a heavily pregnant Fidel and their daughter, Sofia, left 30C weather in Buenos Aires for overnight lows of -20C. For Jelin, the move renewed a pattern: his family had left Belarus for a more welcoming Argentina three decades previously.    People said, 'Winnipeg? Such a boring place.' And I said, Yes, we want a place where it isnt dangerous to go outside'  Uriel Jelin     Canada is very open to newcomers. You receive a lot of help, he says, citing free government-provided English lessons and assistance from both Argentinian and Jewish community organisations. There are a lot of mechanisms to help you integrate. The couple now have a Winnipeg-born son, Eliel, to join Sofia, and Fidel jokes that the family practically lives at Winnipegs Jewish community centre, where Spanish, Russian and Hebrew can be heard in the halls. It was very easy for us to sympathise and make friends with other newcomers, mostly Israelis. Same age. More or less same social profile. Small kids. Also Jewish. Also migrants. Finding work was not as easy. Jelins first job, at a call centre, didnt get off to a smooth start: The first month was terrible, for me and for the people on the other side of the phone. They suffered a lot, I suffered a lot. But it was very good for my English,,he says. The value of the experience was a lot more than the money. Fidel eventually found work at the Jewish National Fund Office, and Jelin is now employed by the Indigenous Leadership Development Institute, a non-profit organisation that provides leadership training to Manitobas sizable indigenous community, with whom he says he feels an affinity as a Latin-American. For now, money in Winnipeg is bit tighter than it was in Buenos Aires.  But coming here was about something else. Its about not putting the chair against the door. Bartley Kives The counsellor Vania Jimenez, founder of La Maison Bleue     My inner earth is Canada  Vania Jimenez. Photograph: Guillaume Simoneau for the Guardian    In 2007, 43 years after she first arrived in Montreal from Cairo, Vania Jimenezs life would already have seemed like the quintessential immigrant success story. She had a thriving practice in family medicine and obstetrics, as well as seven Canadian-born children. She taught at McGill University, her alma mater. But for Jimenez something was still missing.  I was delivering babies for women, and then I would lose touch immediately, she says. There was no follow-up. Sensing that many of her patients, especially lower-income women or immigrants, would benefit from additional help or counseling, this gave Jimenez cause for concern. I could see they were getting nothing. One day I came home agonising about this, and my daughter said, Well, do something about it. In 2007 Jimenez and her daughter, Amelie Sigouin, founded La Maison Bleue, a house that offers medical services and counselling for pregnant women in need both before and after they give birth. The house, bought and renovated through charitable donations and government funding, celebrates its tenth anniversary next year. It now serves as a model for other service providers in low-income Montreal neighbourhoods.    If we were all the same colour, we wouldnt have a rainbow anymore.    When I first wanted to become a doctor, it was because I had seen an image of Albert Schweitzer with an infant. Many of the women we are helping here are poor, some are refugees, some are dealing with conjugal violence or drug abuse. Were helping them and their children to improve their lives. This has always been my dream, to do what practicing medicine is really supposed to do. Jimenezs own childhood in Egypt had been idyllic. Her father, the son of an Armenian immigrant, ran a profitable flour mill. But after the Suez Crisis ended in 1956, a spirit of pan-Arab nationalism took hold. We definitely felt that things had changed. There was growing mistrust of Jews, and people who spoke English or French. We were Armenian immigrants, and Christian. We were never persecuted. But suddenly, we were the Other. Her decision to move to Canada, and attend McGills medical school, was a simple one. It was either that or Australia, she recalls. In the sixties, they were the only two countries that were welcoming to immigrants. She knew little else about the country, but her imagination told me that Canada was a place full of snow and ears and noses on the ground that had fallen off after being frozen.        video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    Justin Trudeau on climate change, the economy and Canadas future    Today Jimenez is also an accomplished writer, with four novels under her belt. They often involve stories of women-physician protagonists who interact with patients from other cultures. She is now at work on her fifth book, a memoir looking back at the time when she first left Cairo for Canada, which has meant poring over lots of old letters to her mother and a friend as part of her research.  They tell of a time when Jimenez was shocked to see young people kissing in public, often quite passionately. This is something I wouldnt see in Cairo, she says. The Quebecois accent also confused her. At one point I wrote about taking the bus, and hearing people speak another language. I told my mother they must be speaking Greek. It turned out they were speaking French, but with a thick Quebec accent. The province has changed a lot since she first arrived: Quebec now has much more self assurance, she says, it is in far less of a fragile place. The need to protect its language and culture in the vast sea of Anglo North America, has in the past bred its own currents of ethnic nationalism  something that didnt always make newcomers feel welcome. Now, she says, there is less extremism, more acceptance. There is a sense we negotiate those differences, rather than try to mesh them into one. If we were all the same colour, we wouldnt have a rainbow anymore. And while she wasnt initially drawn to Canada for any larger reasons, she says being here now makes sense: I couldnt see myself doing the things Im doing anywhere else. My inner earth is Canada.  Matt Hays The singer Bruno Capinan, musician     You can be gay in Rio, but in the rest of Brazil its a different story ... Bruno Capinan. Photograph: Lorne Bridgman for the Guardian    When Bruno Capinan was growing up in Salvador de Bahia, his voice made him a frequent target of bullies  for its sounding too soft and effeminate by macho Brazilian norms. I was bullied so badly, he says, that the principal called my mother to tell her I should go to the doctor and get male hormone treatments. Capinan resisted, though his voice would long be a painful, teasing topic of conversation among his parents and relatives. Today, that voice  acrobatic, sensual, both angelic and profane  is what listeners of his Tropicalia-inspired music first latch on to. Its his voice that gets first mention in most reviews; Brazils biggest newspaper, O Globo, called it smooth, well-placed, unusual, and able to take off to higher altitudes. Divina Graa is Capinans third release  and first with the full support of a Brazilian record label  all of which hes made only since moving to Toronto in 2008. Relocating to Canada might be one of the unlikelier routes to having a musical career in Brazil. For Capinan, though, exploring his creativity could only come in a place where he felt free to be himself. Maybe its because Im kind of weird, but I wanted to move to a place that was very cold, says Capinan. The opposite of Bahia, which is very hot. Even more so, he wanted to escape Salvadors oppressive homophobia  from the casual ease of anti-gay jokes to the harassment by police when out socialising with friends.  Brazil is screwed up, he says. Its a country with some of the most sexual and sensual people on earth. Its also the country where more trans people are killed than anywhere else, especially trans people of colour. Its very hard to be gay in Brazil. Maybe you can be gay in Rio, but in the rest of Brazil its a different story.    More trans people are killed in Brazil than anywhere else, especially trans people of colour  Bruno Capinan     Capinan first tried out Toronto with a two-month stay in 2006: It felt like a familiar place to me, like Id always been here. The city also gave him courage to experiment with his flamboyant stage persona and vocal tone, and playing with peoples assumptions about gender. I know it sounds corny, but here there was the freedom to do the things I want to do, while being 100% myself. At open mic nights, bars and music clubs, Capinan quickly found a supportive scene, including many seasoned players of Brazilian music. Looking back at his first two Toronto-made records, Capinan describes them as transitional, a process of digging into his Bahian roots from afar. But even though Divina Graa features a dedication on its back cover to afro-blocos  the neighborhood percussion groups, often with socio-political leanings, that are the lifeblood of carnival  he thinks of it as a Canadian record that just happens to be sung in Portuguese. The songs, drenched in that forlorn, temperamentally Brazilian sensibility known as saudade, are about his life and loves in Toronto. And despite production help from Brazilian heavyweights Dominico Lancellotti and Bem Gil (son of Gilberto), most of the musicians are Canadian  something that pleasantly surprised Brazilian reviewers. With momentum building toward a career breakthrough, trips back to Brazil are becoming longer and more frequent. Increasingly, when hes out in Salvador, Sao Paulo or Rio, Capinan is stopped by admiring fans. Its very strange for me, he admits. But if one person connects with the music, or my life, and sees theres a way out of the darkness of being gay and black in Brazil, then Im happy with that. Chris Frey"
"29""  A major review into the UKs gender discrimination laws is to be launched amid fears a potential post-Brexit move towards a lower regulation economy could see protections eroded. The nine-month inquiry by the Fawcett Society is to be led by Dame Laura Cox, a retired high court judge, assisted by a series of lawyers, academics and others. Areas of equality law to be examined include measures to guarantee equal pay, protection for part-time workers and during pregnancy, and combating so-called intersectional discrimination, where someone faces potential disadvantage for not just their gender but another area, for example race or religion.  Sam Smethers, chief executive of the Fawcett Society, which marked its 150th anniversary last year, said the organisation had wanted to examine a number of gaps in our equality legislation even before the Brexit vote, but that there seemed a greater need than ever. While the government had promised to protect equality and the rights of workers following departure from the EU, Smethers said, the concern was that some protections could be lost almost inadvertently amid wider changes. Both Theresa May and her chancellor, Philip Hammond, have warned the EU that if Britain does not secure a sufficiently good deal on departure the UK could strike out alone with a low-tax economy designed to attract investment.  The real worry weve got is that those kind of assurances are actually quite superficial, and they are probably a second order commitment compared to the need to secure a competitive economy, and how we compete if were outside the trading bloc, Smethers said. This fear of a race to the bottom and becoming this low-regulation, low-tax economy is, I think, a very real one.  The prime minister may well mean it now when she says it, and has to her credit got a good track record on women rights in a number of respects, but I think shes going to be forced into a corner where its going to be very hard for her to retain that, when the pressure is to compete on other terms. She added: Theres only so many battles well be able to fight in one go. We cant defend everything at the same time, so things will slip through. Were trying to push in the other direction. The so-called great repeal bill, which will incorporate EU rules in UK law, had the potential for some protections to be eliminated at a later date, Smethers said.  The Fawcett Society is behind one of the dozens of amendments to the government bill to trigger article 50, which begins Brexit, seeking to prevent protections being repealed. However, Smethers said the point of the review was not just to cling on to what already existed but to prompt a more fundamental rethink, for example on companies abiding by regulations. Thats where were getting the balance wrong, she said. Organisations need to have more responsibility placed on them. Its very difficult for the individual women to bring a claim.  Its not just about trying to protect the minimum. Its about trying to create a forward-looking idea of what sort of country we want to be, and where we want to get to. The society is inviting people to send in submissions to the review, which will report in the autumn. Cox, who will chair it, said it was an important and timely project.  She said: Some of the basic rights that we now take for granted  pregnancy and maternity rights, part-time workers rights, equal pay for work of equal value  are all at risk if the UK becomes a low-regulation economy."
"30""The gender pay gap by which women earn significantly less than men during their careers begins early in childhood with boys receiving 20% more pocket money than girls, according to a report. Not only do girls receive less money, they are allowed less financial independence; they are less likely to receive regular payments than boys, and are more dependent on others to buy items for them and manage their money on their behalf. Whereas boys aged five to 16 receive an average of 10.70 per week from either pocket money, payment for chores or paid work, girls of the same age receive just 8.50, and the gap widens as the children get older, the findings suggest. According to the report by market research agency Childwise, between the ages of 11 and16 the gap grows to 30%, with boys receiving an average weekly income of 17.80 and girls of the same age lagging behind with 12.50. The report, which is conducted annually and is based on online surveys with 2,000 schoolchildren, reveals not only the inequality between boys and girls in terms of hard cash, it also indicates the different messages parents give their sons and daughters about money and financial management. While boys are more likely to be given regular cash payments, giving them financial autonomy from an early age, the survey findings suggest parents of girls are more likely to keep hold of their daughters money, then hand it over when it is required. The data points towards an early gender imbalance in the way parents educate their children about money matters and financial independence, said Childwises research manager, Jenny Ehren. Boys are more likely to be entrusted with regular cash payments, while girls are more reliant on other people buying them items, or managing money on their behalf. Girls pocket money is more likely to be supplemented by parents buying expensive items such as clothes and footwear, as well as much cheaper purchases including toiletries and makeup. The value of these purchases almost certainly helps to bridge the income gap between boys and girls, said Ehren, but the approach to managing finances is noticeably different. Children pick up gender clues all around them, some subtle, and some not so subtle. The challenge for parents is to avoid inadvertently perpetuating these gender divisions themselves, and to help children learn the skills needed to be a confident and independent adult. According to the latest statistics, the current overall gender pay gap for full-time workers is 13.9%. Sam Smethers, the chief executive of the Fawcett Society, which campaigns for pay equality, responded to the reports findings with irony: Prepare your daughter for working life  give her less pocket money than your son. It seems that the gender pay gap starts at home. These figures reveal that we undervalue girls from a very early age. What chance do they have at work? Elsewhere in the wide-ranging report, findings suggest there has been a rise in the proportion of girls aged 15 and 16 taking part in sport at school, with three in four now participating, compared with just half in 2015. Smethers welcomed the increase, saying: Perhaps an indication of the success of Sport Englands This Girl Can campaign and a legacy of the Olympics? Looking at childrens and young peoples use of mobiles, 31% said they had to check their devices every few minutes, rising to 42% of 17- to 18-year-olds, while a quarter of nine- to 16-year-olds admitted to turning off or getting round parental safety controls online. Even among children at primary school, the survey found that mobiles were taking over from tablets. The mobile phone is increasingly becoming a preferred go-to multimedia gadget for children overall, said the Childwise research director, Simon Leggett. For primary-aged children particularly, exposure to what a tablet can offer has left them wanting more, especially when they are outside the home."
"31""A taxi firm has been criticised over a sexist marketing campaign featuring an apparently overweight middle-aged women and the slogan If I start to look sexy book a taxi. Dont make bad decisions because youve had one too many.    Outrage over Bristol taxi firm&#39;s &#39;sexist&#39;, &#39;fat and age-shaming&#39; advert Bristol Post (@BristolPost) January 4, 2017    The company behind the advert, Bristol-based CityFox, insisted it carried a serious message about getting home safely after drinking and said it would not apologise for using humour to make a point.  However, the campaign group Bristol women Voice condemned the image, claiming it reinforced harmful gender stereotypes. The groups chair, Penny Gane, said: We are appalled to see this advert being used by CityFox taxis. Images such as this are antiquated and reinforce harmful gender stereotypes and messages that women are to be judged by their physical appearance alone as well as being fat- and age-shaming. It is unacceptable for businesses to use derogatory and sexist images, especially when targeting younger audiences. This should be seen as an opportunity to present modern images that challenge harmful stereotypes and present a broad range of representations that young people can relate to.  The campaign also featured an image of a man in a vest with a rose tattoo and a paunch leering at the camera with a beer in his hand with the same slogan.  CityFox Group defended its intentions but said the campaign had been withdrawn.  Sophie Palmer, the companys marketing and communications manager, said: As one of the west countrys biggest taxi providers, we see all too often the effects that excessive alcohol consumption can have on peoples safety and wellbeing, and the destructive consequences for society when this leads to antisocial behaviour. This campaign featured two posters  one depicting a male and one a female  in an attempt to encourage people to think about the need to be able to get home in a safe and orderly manner when theyve had a few too many to drink. We make no apology for using humour and hard-hitting messages to highlight this issue  in order for people to think about the possible effects of their behaviour it is necessary to get their attention and get a reaction. The campaign has attracted many positive comments. However, it would never be our intention to cause embarrassment or offence, and as such we have withdrawn the campaign. We want people to enjoy the benefits of a night on the town, but also to make sure they get home safely afterwards, and we are always happy to work positively with any individual or organisation to achieve this aim. CityFox might have seen the controversy coming. In 2015, a Southampton-based company, West Quay Cars, used the same image of the women with a similar slogan: If I Start To Look Sexy  Book A Taxi. It led to members of Southampton Universitys Feminist Society calling for students to boycott the firm. CityFox provides taxi services in Bristol, Bath and Plymouth. It has more than 100 vehicles and employs 120 people.  In 2015, a Cardiff-based bus company came under fire for promoting a new route with a poster on the back of its vehicles showing an apparently topless women holding a sign saying ride me all day for 3.  "
"32""The economy Donald Trumps economic nationalism was on full display in his inauguration speech. The president spoke of the American carnage he claims has been wrought on America, leaving rusted out factories scattered like tombstones across a nation with little to celebrate, and blamed it on the outsourcing of US jobs. America first will be his presiding philosophy. Those people left behind by the globalization and the deindustrialization of America helped elect Trump and they will be cheered by his message. But who benefitted from this transformation? According to a report published in December by University of California at Berkeley economists Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman, the average pre-tax income of the bottom 50% of adults has stagnated since 1980 at about $16,000 per adult while the average pre-tax income of the top 1% rose from $420,000 to about $1.3m. The wealthiest 1% now owns over 37% of household wealth, the bottom 50%  some 160 million people  owns a mere 0.1%.        video\"            data-video-provider=\"The Guardian/Getty Images\"            >    A guide to Donald Trumps potential cabinet of billionaires    Trumps supporters can blame outside forces for their feelings of economic insecurity but it is people like Trump and his cabinet, set to be the richest in history, who have been the main beneficiary of the economic forces that have reshaped America. Trumps supporters will have to trust them to work against their own interests if they want to Make America Great Again. Dominic Rushe Justice  Trump continued to position himself as a law and order president, painting a stark image of a country ridden with the crime and gangs and drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential. This American carnage stops right here and stops right now, he pledged. Obama spent the past two and a half years trying to delicately push forward both gun control laws and a fraught debate over how to reduce police violence towards black Americans. He repeatedly emphasized the good work of most police officers, but also refused to dismiss the mistrust and frustration many black Americans feel towards law enforcement.   Related: Want to fix gun violence in America? Go local.    Trump, in contrast, has put himself and his administration squarely in the camp of police unions, who have literally turned their backs when leaders like New York City mayor Bill DeBlasio have decided to treat black Americans concerns about police brutality seriously. Trump famously claimed during the campaign that Chicago police could stop the citys sudden spike in gun violence in one week by being very much tougher. Using tough police tactics, was the key, he said, which is OK when people are being killed. After years of record lows in murder and violent crime, the United States saw a troubling 10.8% uptick in murders in 2015  the biggest single-year increase in decades, though one that left the number of murders roughly the same they had been in 2009. Experts say its too soon to know how serious this increase might be  much less what has caused it. But Trump has selectively taken the worst statistics and waved them like a bloody flag. The new president has made clear that he will take a tough-on-crime stance. despite the building bipartisan consensus that a less-punitive, less-costly criminal justice system is likely to make Americans safer. Lois Beckett  National security  Of all the striking moments in Donald Trumps caustic inaugural address, few were more discordant than a president whose associates are under investigation for their connections to a foreign power using America first as a slogan. The intelligence agencies that Trump has been feuding with since his electoral victory have concluded Russia interfered in the election for his benefit. They have sought a foreign-intelligence surveillance warrant to examine his associates connections to Russia and reportedly are combing through foreign communications and financial transaction records to that end. Additionally, the Senate intelligence committee has initiated an inquiry into the same subject, and has signaled its willingness to subpoena Trump aides.    Related: Senate intelligence committee to question Trump team on links with Russia    The course of those inquiries will be the backdrop under which Trump conducts US foreign policy and stewards its national security. In his address, which portrayed him as leading the nation out of an era of American carnage unleashed by parasitic elites, Trump beat a loud nationalist drum. Every foreign capital will soon learn, its only going to be America first, Trump said. His only sop to a universalist vision of America was to say that every nation has the right to similarly place their interests first. Trump alluded to forging new alliances  a seeming reference to his oft-stated desire to bring the US closer to Russia  in order to unite the civilized world against radical Islamic terrorism, which we will eradicate from the face of the earth. While moments earlier, Trump lamented the loss of trillions of dollars through wasteful foreign conflicts, he set a rhetorical commitment to an expansive war against an undifferentiated adversary. For years, the far right has argued that only a willingness to blame an amorphous concept called radical Islam  often conflated with Islam itself, and understood that way by millions of Muslims in the US and worldwide  can precipitate a victorious conclusion to the 9/11 era. They are about to have their test case in president Trump.        video\"            data-video-provider=\"Reuters\"            >    Trumps inaugural speech in full    Its going to be America first is a statement that conceals more than it reveals, particularly on national security. While Trump offered few specifics, he criticized the US subsidiz[ing] the armies of foreign countries while allowing the depletion of our own military. That subsidy is the by, with and through approach to training foreign militaries that gave Barack Obamas Pentagon an alternative to the ponderous ground warfare Trump first embraced in Iraq and then repudiated. Several of those armies, including Kurdish peshmerga irregulars, Iraqi soldiers, Syrian rebels and Libyan government forces  Muslims all  comprise the forces fighting the Islamic State across Mosul, on the approaches to Raqqa and in Sirte. An early test of Trumps stewardship will come when he decides whether to revoke such subsidies or jettison his inaugural rhetoric. Spencer Ackerman Health  Trump was inaugurated with just a nod to one promise he campaigned on  making Americas healthcare great again.  Though Trump devoted portions of his dark speech to crime, trade, immigration, jobs and even gangs, his only reference to Americans struggles to afford their healthcare was a promise to to free the Earth from the miseries of disease. However, if the new president is interested in fulfilling promises to listen to the American people made during his speech, he might take a second look at Congressional Republicans plan to repeal Barack Obamas signature health law, the Affordable Care Act. Only 20% of the public wants Congress to repeal the ACA without a replacement in hand, according to a January Kaiser Family Foundation poll. Another 47% dont want the law repealed at all, and a remaining 28% want a plan first. But, so far, Republicans have been coy with details.   s signature healthcare plan is high on the Republican agenda.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Barack and Michelle Obama stand with President Trump and Melania Trump at the inauguration. Repealing Obamas signature healthcare plan is high on the Republican agenda. Photograph: POOL/Reuters    Trumps speech did touch on one specific health problem: addiction. The crime and gangs and drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential, said Trump. This American carnage stops right here and stops right now. In fact, there is one significant reform that helped cover millions of Americans addiction treatment  the Affordable Care Act. Jessica Glenza  Climate  Unsurprisingly given its anonymity during the election, there was no mention of climate change or the environment in Donald Trumps inauguration speech. He mentioned mountains and oceans, but only in context of locations in America that will be great again once he solves all of its maladies.    Related: Scott Pruitt's EPA: a dream for oil and gas firms is nightmare for environment    Trump did mention the US foolishly spending trillions of dollars overseas which partly references climate spending that the new president wants to axe. Barack Obama managed to push $500m out of the door for developing countries threatened by rising seas and droughts in his final week in office. Further assistance is now unlikely. Most telling was what was happening off-stage. The White House websites expansive section on climate change has now been deleted. In its stead is an America first energy plan in which Trump promises to scrap the harmful and unnecessary climate action plan. This move, as well as Trumps speech, is a clear indication the president will simply ignore climate change, as if it does not exist, during his term. Oliver Milman Immigration  President Trump referred to border protection three times throughout his short inauguration speech, a sure sign of the emphasis he will place upon it as he attempts to enforce the draconian immigration reforms he pledged on the campaign trail.  Weve defended other nations borders while refusing to defend our own, Trump said. Critics would argue the remark is patently false. The Obama administration deported more undocumented immigrants than any before it, and took significant measures to secure Americas southern border. Now the majority of migrants crossing the southern border come from Central America, many of whom are women and children seeking asylum from violence and instability in the region. Trump has also pledged to suspend Americas intake of Syrian refugees, who are already subjected to substantial security vetting before they enter the country, and it seems likely the president will move forward with this promise within the next few days. Coupled with Trumps infamous promise to erect a wall across the entire southern border, it remains unclear just how much damage he will do to some of the worlds most vulnerable people in the name of border defense. Oliver Laughland   Related: Women's movement 'powder keg' ignited by Trump election    Gender Trump didnt mention gender issues in his inaugural speech. But in the days leading up to his swearing-in, his transition team unveiled a plan to eliminate $480m in Violence Against Women grants and his nomination for education secretary, Betsy DeVos, refused to commit to upholding the Obama administrations aggressive stance on campus sexual assault or the rights of trans students. Republicans in Congress have moved swiftly to repeal Obamacare, which expanded contraception access and prohibited insurers from charging women more for health care, and to cut off Planned Parenthoods participation in Medicaid. Molly Redden"
"33""Donald Trumps election has ignited a powder keg under the global women rights movement that will have far-reaching ramifications, according to organisers of a global women march due to take place on Saturday. As many as 500,000 people are expected to descend on the US capital for the women March on Washington the day after Trumps inauguration, joined by as many as 1.5m more marching in support in 161 cities across all seven continents.  With marches being held in 61 countries from Germany to East Timor, organisers from women March Global, the international arm of the Washington march, are determined to capitalise on the wave of activism that has attracted hundreds of thousands of first-time campaigners as well as seasoned activists.  The women of the world were sitting on a powder keg and Donald Trump just lit the match, said Evvie Harmon, a women March co-founder and global coordinator. Set up after Trumps election victory, the global movement is being hailed as an unprecedented grassroots movement and organisers say it will have an immediate and concrete impact. Many international coordinators say they are marching in solidarity with US women, but that human rights and not Donald Trump are the focus. Cells set up throughout the US and hundreds of other places are plotting local campaigns, from preventing the construction of oil pipelines to outlawing female genital mutilation. They will be based around the guiding vision of the women March on issues such as the rights of immigrant, disabled and LGBTQIA women and female workers. Individual groups will decide which targeted actions to take, Harmon said.  I dont know any grassroots organisation that has grown to this size in only two months. There are now about 1,000 coordinators around the world. Its too big and its growing too fast to control, she said. And we wouldnt want to. We just want to support and help it to flourish. Marches are due to take place in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and Erbil, Iraq where an organiser from Alliance for Peace and Human Rights (APHRO) said holding the march was a challenge because of tribalism, corruption and the difficulty of getting approval from the government who deny that women have challenges in this Iraqi society.  With solidarity we women are daring to stand up to the challenge of lack of salaries, terror, hate, exploitation, and trafficking, she said. In the UK 25,000 people are expected to join the women March on London, with another 14 marches in towns and cities across Britain including Cardiff, Edinburgh, Liverpool, Leeds and Belfast.   Related: Women's marches across the UK: what you need to know    On Friday the campaign group Bridges not Walls unfurled banners with anti-Trump messages across bridges in British cities, and protesters on Tower Bridge in London held up pink letters reading Act now! Thousands of people were expected to gather outside the US embassy in the early evening for a rally organised by the Stand Up To Racism campaign. As many as 500 marchers could turn up in the small town of Shipley in West Yorkshire, in the constituency of the Conservative MP and vocal Trump supporter Philip Davies. If we dont raise our views, its like people with the Trump and Philip Davies view of the world have won  there is a good half of the population who dont want that kind of world, and we have to speak up, said Sue Easterbrook, one of the organisers. The global women March, which also includes a Penguins for Peace protest on an expedition ship in Antarctica and a small gathering in East Timor, marked a dramatic renewal of feminist politics, said Sophie Walker, the leader of the UKs women Equality party. People are realising that the time to act is now, they dont have to wait for permission to tell the world what they want and believe in, she said.  Populist rhetoric had created a sense of urgency and desire for action, said Amnestys UK director, Kate Allen. Human rights and women rights are hard won and at this critical time it is vital to stand together to celebrate our gains and against discrimination and division, she said. The politics of fear have no place in 2017. Karen Olson, a global coordinator of the women March based in Geneva, said the movement had mind-boggling potential. Technology such as the messaging service Slack, which enables global campaigners to connect in real time, and the reach of social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter was incredibly powerful, she said: We are building a global movement, not focused on a negative catalyst but on everything we hold dear. Harmon, a yoga teacher before joining the movement as a coordinator, said she and many others were not prepared to stand down after Saturdays protests. If this doesnt continue to grow it would be an awful waste of what we have accomplished, she said.  I am going to be marching until we achieve equality. Ill stop then, or when I die. Why Im marching Maria Kostaki author, 43, AthensWhile not a citizen of the US, I am organising this march in Athens because I believe the issues it represents are global. Its about humanity. Its about women rights, racism, equality, LGBT rights. I have a four-year-old son and I do not want him to grow up in a world where everything we have fought for is taken away. We cant allow anyone to reverse what we have built. Lotje Horvers tour manager, 34, AmsterdamI want to be part of the message to the world that there are more people who love than people who hate, and I will not stand by silently while a lying bully is given one of the most responsible positions in the world. I cannot be at peace with the fact he uses his voice to set an example that it is acceptable to be demeaning to women and minorities. Rachel Druck rabbinical student, 31, Tel AvivI am studying to be a rabbi and one of the major values of Judaism is accepting the other, making a place for the stranger and remembering once a year that once we were slaves in Egypt. Those values are propelling me. Im marching because Trump ran a campaign of Islamophobia, antisemitism, misogyny, and racism: to stand up and say he does not speak for me. Natalino Soares Ornai Guterres consultant, 27, Dili, East TimorI have been displaced from my home and have travelled to other countries (including the US) in search of better opportunities. Being a member of the LGBT community, I am involved because I understand the struggle that our mothers, sisters and people with non-binary gender identities have to go through in a patriarchal society. Aisha Ali-Khan part-time teacher and carer, 36, ShipleyI wanted to show solidarity with the rest of the women all over the world. Women are not being heard by those in power anywhere in the world  if they were we wouldnt be marching today. Im a Muslim, of Pakistani heritage  this is not just a white women march, its all women, all over the world. Its a really inclusive movement and its amazing to be a part of that. Shoomi Chowdhury Amnesty International, LondonWe have so much left to do with regards to rights for ethnic minorities, particularly women from ethnic minorities, and not only is the potential for progress going to be lost, weve taken a massive step back. In 20 years, I want to be able to tell my children I went out and marched the day after Donald Trump became president.  Nazila Kivi feminist magazine editor, Copenhagen Im marching in solidarity with people gendered as women all around the world, especially indigenous, queer and migrant women, who are under a double burden of oppression. Women and our bodies very often become battle grounds for conservative and backwards ideas of nations, borders and racist ideologies. Solidarity and activism is all we have. Ritah Mutheu Muia entrepreneur, 37, NairobiWe march as the Her Voice society in Kenya because we stand in solidarity with our sisters from the US. We want to send a message that any act or policies that violate human rights or women rights will not be tolerated. In Kenya the fight against gender-based violence is far from over. As Kenyan women we have decided to break the silence."
"34""Up to 2 million people marched in cities around the world in solidarity with the women March on Washington. Although not specifically billed as protests against the inauguration of Donald Trump, the vast majority highlighted issues they saw as under threat from the new US administration.  We spoke to protesters around the world about why they took part. I grew up as a women knowing that rights can always be taken away from us  Andreea Molocea, Prague    [Trump] is bad news not only for Muslim, black, Mexican, LGBTQI, but for the entire planet.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"682\" class=\"gu-image\" />  [Trump] is bad news not only for Muslim, black, Mexican, LGBTQI, but for the entire planet. Photograph: Andreaa Molocea    By denying global warming, the US takes steps back by reinforcing greed and money as a supreme value. The only value I know and I obey as a women and human being is life. Life is what matters and life is what the political system is threatening now. A man that believes he is superior and does not care for the planet will never care for its people, for the diversity that we are. The election of Donald Trump was a big shock for Europe. He is bad news not only for Muslim, black, Mexican [and] LGBTQI [people] but for the entire planet. He is gathering in his administration people who are united by greed and white supremacy, and are very ignorant about climate change. In my home country of Romania, Trump is already being praised as a role model by conservative and nationalistically oriented politicians. The danger to have a switch to fascism is real and can not be denied.  I grew up as a women knowing that rights can always be taken away from us, ready to stand up when times will ask for it, but I never thought that this will happen so soon or at this scale. White men, we dont want to subjugate you, we just want to be equal. Whats so scary about that?  Maggie Bunuel, Paris   My only hope is that our resistance is inexorable and his tenure as brief as possible.\" width=\"563\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  My only hope is that our resistance is inexorable and his tenure as brief as possible. Photograph: Bridget Farrenkopf Habib    Physically showing up has so much more power than tweeting from your couch. Ive raged and bellowed all over the internet and among friends, but being part of a movement means actually getting out there and moving your body sometimes.  I am passionate about equality, opportunity, safety and dignity for all. This is what most perplexes me. White men, we dont want to subjugate you, we just want to be equal. Whats so scary about that? My only hope is that our resistance is inexorable and his tenure as brief as possible. Whats not to fear? Climate disaster, human rights violations, the dismantling of the constitution, the dissolution of America as we know it, nuclear war. Whatever happens in the US will affect the entire world, so theres no escaping its reach.  Id attended the Paris Against Trump march a week after the election and we were understandably shocked and despondent. Yesterday, there were 10 times as many people, and the energy was ecstatic, proud, defiant and loving.  I take it very personally when a man says its OK to grab an unwilling pussy  Dana LeMarr, New York   Gay rights, women rights, equality  nuclear disarmament  they are an essential part of democracy, freedom, and humanity.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"713\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Gay rights, women rights, equality  nuclear disarmament  they are an essential part of democracy, freedom, and humanity. Photograph: Dana Le Marr    I fear that Trumps insistence that good honest journalism is fake news, because its critical of him, smacks of Big Brother in Orwells 1984. Russia isnt a country that a free democratic country wants to emulate, yet Trump seems to be warmer to Putin than Melania. And four years of Trump could push us past the [climate change] tipping point.  Im an survivor of incest, so I take it very personally when a man says its OK to grab an unwilling pussy. Theres gay rights, women rights, equality and our basic freedoms at stake. Theres world peace, nuclear disarmament and Nato. Dont even get me started on the constitution. Im passionate about all of these things because they are an essential part of democracy, freedom, and humanity. Trump hasnt even responded to the millions of us who protested. What president behaves in that puerile manner? Were fucked. We have to join hands, have faith, and work together to make the best of a damn bad deal. Ive been drowning in feelings of shame, anger, confusion and bitterness since Trump won the election. Today, I found humanity walking beside me. Life is good if only there wasnt Brexit and Trump  Meike Brunkhorst, London   The march has restored my belief in solidarity among women and society.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"750\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Meike Brunkhorst, right, with Farika Holden: The march has restored my belief in solidarity among women and society. Photograph: Carmen Fishwick    So happy to be carrying dicks on sticks through central London! I am upset by misogyny, discrimination, racism and prejudices being endorsed and deemed OK by Trump becoming president of a world power. I am a German-born Londoner who arrived more than 30 years ago as an au pair. My home is Notting Dale and I am scared of the prospect of being sent packing. Life is good if only there wasnt Brexit and Trump. The march has restored my belief in solidarity among women and society. The vibe was positive, uplifting and optimistic. It may not have an effect on world politics but it proves we are not alone. Thousands of individuals of different backgrounds coming together, joined by a sense of the world shifting in the wrong direction. I dont consider Trump a leader and hope his time in post wont be long-term. I fear that much of his rhetoric will continue and we will become even more divided  Hilary OHaire, Boston   We need to support one another, and be willing to listen to an opinion different than our own.\" width=\"500\" height=\"483\" class=\"gu-image\" />  We need to support one another, and be willing to listen to an opinion different than our own. Photograph: Hilary O'Haire    It was important to me to attend the event because I think about all the generations of women who have come before me, and the many generations to come. I do not have to work on Saturdays to support my family like so many others in this country have to do. I hope we can come together as a country. I fear that much of his rhetoric will continue and we will become even more divided. We need to support one another, and be willing to listen to an opinion different than our own. We all live in our own bubble. I became emotional when listening to the speakers, many who continue to fight on our behalf every single day. I loved seeing so many people united together, and it was truly special to be a part of. We were marching  to save us from the cultural wasteland created by someone so hostile to the arts, the free press  Edward Wouk, Florence, Italy   We were marching for women rights and human rights, to save our planet against climate change.\" width=\"838\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  We were marching for women rights and human rights, to save our planet against climate change. Photograph: Edward Wouk    We were marching for women rights and human rights, to save our planet against climate change, and to save us from the cultural wasteland created by someone so hostile to the arts, the free press, and dissenting views generally. What might have differentiated this one [from other marches] was, perhaps, the very high number of scholars who came along to protest so many aspects of Trumps vile rhetoric and repulsive policies, and especially his apparent pledge to eviscerate the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities.  The march attracted huge attention as hundreds snaked through the historic streets of Florence, pausing in the Galleria degli Uffizi, the famous art museum, and in front of the Duomo and the Signoria.  I hope that people will work harder to develop empathy and tear down Trumps walls  Kate Johnson, Bristol   I worry about climate change, because its something that isnt going to wait another four years for a rational response.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"750\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Kate Johnson (left): I worry about climate change, because its something that isnt going to wait another four years for a rational response. Photograph: Kate Johnson    I worry about climate change, because its something that isnt going to wait another four years for a rational response. On an emotional level, Im worried about the way people are treated: black lives matter, LGBQT lives matter, refugees matter, immigrants matter, accessible healthcare matters. The discouraged white man trying to support his family, who may have voted against himself when he voted for Trump, or for Brexit  he matters, too. Trumps win is devastating, and motivating. Ive taken for granted that I live in a democracy, and that people are basically good. The way Trumps bullying has inspired more bullying hurts. So, now its time to get engaged, to call representatives, to show up, to be kind. My only hope is that others will continue to stay alert and engaged, and that America will have a reckoning with itself. I hope that people will work harder to develop empathy and tear down Trumps walls. If we continue to stick together ... I believe it will just be an apostrophe in Americas history  Lucy Rouse, Amsterdam    He seems to have convinced nearly half of the US that he is somehow in it for them and then proceeds to fill his administration with billionaires.\" width=\"750\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  He seems to have convinced nearly half of the US that he is somehow in it for them and then proceeds to fill his administration with billionaires. Photograph: Lucy Rouse    After feeling decidedly depressed having forced myself to sit through Trumps inauguration speech yesterday, today felt better. There are enough people out there who celebrate diversity and condemn his behaviour and views. If we all continue to stick together and speak up, I believe it will just be an apostrophe in Americas history, as Obama said. Although, Im actually not sure I believe that right now but Im going to keep saying it until I do. Its hard to pinpoint what I feel most strongly about or what I am more scared about  that he objectifies women so much, that he plans to roll back Obamacare, that he seems to have convinced nearly half of the US that he is somehow in it for them and then proceeds to fill his administration with billionaires. Its reported that he has already taken down the LGBT and civil rights movement section on the White House website.   Related: 'This is just the beginning': women who marched against Trump vow to fight on    But after today, I do think if there is enough of us that can continue to do small things every day, maybe he wont do as much damage as recently Ive been fearing he will.  I fear his dishonesty, disrespect, ignorance, his impulsivity, and self-aggrandising attitude  Daniel Schechter, Geneva   I am fearful of his bringing us to war: military battle, cyberwar, trade war rather than to peace and greater understanding.\" width=\"358\" height=\"500\" class=\"gu-image\" />  I am fearful of his bringing us to war: military battle, cyberwar, trade war rather than to peace and greater understanding. Photograph: Dan Schechter    I have felt helpless in stopping the relentless and dim-witted attacks on the free press, on civil and human rights, gender equality, environmental protection particularly, given global warming, equal access to physical and mental healthcare and education.  My hopes are that Trump will realise that he is in over his head and that he is wielding enormous but not endless power, for which the American people (and the world) hold him accountable. If he does not change rapidly (and I am not optimistic, based on what I have seen since the campaign), I hope for his resigning or being impeached.  My fear is Trumps dishonesty, disrespect, ignorance, his impulsivity, and self-aggrandising attitude in light of what I take to be great insecurity along with his overwhelming need to win and be praised are going to do damage to Americas people, to human rights, to Americas role as a model of democracy, and to the world order and nature itself. I am fearful of his bringing us to war  military battle, cyberwar, trade war  rather than to peace and greater understanding. Attending the march made me feel empowered, less alone, and realising that each of us can make a difference however small. We are all together with loud voices, important messages, humour and reflection and determination. It was glorious. [At the march] I felt hopeful for the future my children will inherit  Sanjay Sabnani, Los Angeles   I took her to the march to let her know that it is always OK to stand up for what you believe in.\" width=\"830\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Sanjay Sabnani with his daughter, Mallika: I took her to the march to let her know that it is always OK to stand up for what you believe in. Photograph: Sanjay Sabnani    As the father of three amazing young women, the son of an incredible mother, and the friend of so many others, I am saddened that they still have to fight for logic and decency. I took my daughter to the march to let her know that it is always OK to stand up for what you believe in and because I want her to know that I believe in her. I also went to make up for the mistakes I have made in wrongly judging women as a younger man. [At the march] I felt hopeful for the future my children will inherit. Any gathering promoting humanity in the spirit of love is one I would consider attending."
"35""For Mindy Finn, Saturdays are cherished times to be with her family. The Republican political operative and founder of Empowered Women, a not-for-profit group focused on inspiring women in civic life, relishes the slower pace after a long workweek. This Saturday will be just like any other: shell eat breakfast with her husband and two young boys, maybe take her kids to the park, and definitely sneak in some shuteye during their naptime.   Related: Women's March on Washington set to be one of America's biggest protests    Carrie Lukas also plans to spend Saturday with her family. Lukas, the managing director of the conservative policy group the Independent women Forum, will take her daughter to a writing contest, and then take the rest of her kids  five in all  to visit their grandparents. And Sarah Isgur Flores, who served as deputy campaign manager to the Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina, will spend the day clad in cozy pajamas, snuggling up with her cat and catching up on Sherlock episodes. One thing they all know for sure? Though they all live in or near Washington, they wont join the thousands of women descending on the capital for the women March on Washington.  The marchs organizers are planning for some 200,000 people: women of all races, creeds and sexual orientations, their partners, their kids.     To think that women only care about abortion and paid maternity leave does a disservice to a lot of conservative women  Tomi Lahren     But conservative women  though divided during the campaign on their support for Donald Trump  wont march. Theyll be on the sidelines, praying that their unexpected standard bearer will actually deliver on their long policy wishlist.  The march isnt called the Leftwing women March on Washington, or the Democratic women March. Its billed as simply the women March on Washington. But despite its intersectional, all-inclusive mission, prominent conservative women say the event doesnt represent all women  particularly, well, themselves. Its going to be a whole bunch of people standing up and saying, Youre not a real women if you dont agree with us, says Flores, who works as the spokeswomen for Jeff Sessions, Donald Trumps pick for attorney general. But the great part about being a conservative women is that we know who we are, we know what our beliefs are, and we know how many women agree with us. Throughout the campaign, Trump has flouted long-held GOP positions on healthcare, taxation and more. In response, those who disagree with Trump have had to differentiate themselves as conservatives rather than Republicans. Were not a Republican organization, Lukas tells me of IWF. Were a conservative organization that stands for certain principles. Not for people, nor for a party.  As Trump continues to change his mind on core policy views, conservative women are sticking to their own beliefs more than ever. Those beliefs are at odds with the unmistakably liberal platform of the women March, which advocates for gender equality, reproductive freedom, paid family leave, an end to police brutality, among other stances.  Conservative women, meanwhile, have more modest aims: theyre hoping for another rightwing justice to fill Antonin Scalias long-vacant supreme court seat, one who is unabashedly opposed to abortion rights. They wholly embrace the Republican effort to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, Obamas signature healthcare law. And their policy goals arent confined to stereotypical women issues.     Anti-abortion activists on the steps of the supreme court. Photograph: Pete Marovich/Getty Images    I find it condescending, insulting and a little demeaning, Tomi Lahren, the 24-year-old firebrand host of Tomi on The Blaze TV, says of that buzzy term. To think that women only care about abortion, and birth control, and paid maternity leave, I think, does a disservice to a lot of conservative women that care about immigration and national security, and Common Core, and the other things that are facing our nation and facing our families. Trumps spotty record as a conservative, along with his seeming disregard for democratic norms, hasnt assured conservative women that hell be their champion  far from it. And his open boasts of sexual assault dont make him an easy person to unite behind. But, after eight years of a president who challenged their core beliefs, Trump at least claims the Republican party mantle. And in Washington, institutional power is the key to passing any serious policy agenda. Im sure that there may be women who are just secretly and behind closed doors shaking their heads, and thinking, I cant believe this guy actually just said that, please dont hold any more press conferences, says Ronnee Schreiber, a professor at San Diego State University and author of Righting Feminism: Conservative Women and American Politics, referring to Trumps bizarre tangle with the media last week.  But national conservative organizations, she predicts, will look past that. What theyre going to do is say, Hey, lets celebrate the fact that, for example, were a pro-life organization and we have a president who claims to be pro-life. Now, we have a chance to actually get an appointment to the supreme court whos pro-life. Trumps position on abortion rights, like most of his beliefs, is far from set in stone. But until he proves his mettle in office or fails spectacularly, the conservative women I spoke with told me that even if they didnt support him during the campaign, they were hoping for the best.   Related: Women's March on Washington: what to know and what to bring    I think its horrible when the president-elect says something thats offensive about women, says Lukas, who, though she would have preferred many of the other 16 GOP candidates who initially entered the primaries, ended up voting for Trump. But then I look at things like the possibility for healthcare reform, and Im super excited about that. For tax reform. Tax reform and the problems with starting businesses and job creation, thats a huge women issue. And I feel very optimistic about that. Mr Trump is not a conservative, she continues. He doesnt come from the conservative movement, the policy movement that Ive always been a part of. But Ive got hope. A bunch of sore losers throwing a tantrum     Mindy Finn, who was the running mate of the US independent presidential candidate Evan McMullin. Photograph: George Frey/Getty Images    Just after the election, in the Final Thoughts segment of her eponymous TV show, Tomi Lahren went on a tear against anti-Trump protesters. Or, as she called them, a bunch of sore losers throwing a tantrum. President-elect Donald Trump has opened his arms to all Americans, Lahren chided. No one is asking you to bow at his feet. But your protests and tantrums arent doing anything for this country. You have every right to do it. But youre just kind of making fools of yourselves at this point. This Saturday, Lahren will be in Washington  she will travel from Dallas to attend the inauguration of Trump, whose campaign she advised on social media starting late last summer.  I dont wake up every day and remind myself that Im a women. I know that Im a women, she says, charging that theres been a concerted effort by Democrats to silence and quiet conservative women, or to diminish conservative women, or to repeal the women card of conservative women.  For a moment last week, it seemed that the women March organizers had reached across the yawning political chasm to include a major plank of conservatism. On Friday, the March announced that one of its hundreds of organizational partners would be the New Wave Feminists, an anti-abortion group based in Texas. Intersectional feminism is the future of feminism and of this movement, one of the events co-chairs told the Atlantic. We must not just talk about feminism as one issue, like access to reproductive care.    I dont wake up every day and remind myself that Im a women. I know that Im a women  Tomi Lahren     Backlash was swift. The feminist writer Roxane Gay tweeted her indignation: Intersectional feminism does not include a pro-life agenda. Thats not how it works! The right to choose is a fundamental part of feminism. By Monday, the organizers had backtracked, releasing a statement clarifying that the Marchs platform is pro-choice, and that has been our stance from day one. When I talked to Lukas before the flap, she said the exclusion of conservative women was par for the course for progressives. Im looking at their little website now, she said, reading the marchs stated mission: Recognizing that our vibrant and diverse communities are the strength of our country. Well, maybe. She laughed hollowly. Maybe they think that. But they sure dont think that diversity of thought is of any interest. They sure arent interested in people who dont support their political agenda. Flores agrees. This leftwing playbook is down to one page, she says, getting into feminazi character: If you dont vote our way, we will call you a racist, we will call you a misogynist, we will call you anti-women. And if you are a women, then were going to call you a traitor, and were going to say youre not a real women. Youre not the right type of women. Those charges, she adds, can be frustrating. But she takes heart that this cycle  despite the overwhelming pressure to support Hillary Clinton on the basis of shared gender  it didnt succeed.  That weaponized feminism, she says, is losing its force. Its time for all women to identify what is truly important The first time Mindy Finn ran for office, it made national news. In October, she jumped into the race for vice-president on a long-shot independent ticket with the former CIA counterterrorism officer Evan McMullin, hoping to serve as a conservative foil to Trumps distinct brand of erratic Republican ideals. The pair didnt get far, failing to even make the ballot in many states.  But Finn, a veteran GOP operative who has worked for George W Bush and Mitt Romney, isnt backing down from defending her conservative, #NeverTrump values. Along with her former running mate, Finn plans to launch an advocacy effort that will catalyze a new conservative movement to defend the constitution against Trump. Its time for all women  and I can say this as a conservative  to identify what is truly important, and to guard those principles and those values, and advocate for them regardless of who is president, or what party is in power, she says. Its a country over party moment.   Related: Are you protesting Trump's inauguration? We want to hear from you    Finn hopes Trump puts the publics interest ahead of his own. But after a long campaign of quite the opposite, she says shes skeptical of his capacity to respect democratic norms. Under Trump, conservative women may be pleased with cabinet appointments, supreme court justices, executive actions. But theres also an underlying fear that America as we know it will cease to exist. President Bush, you could disagree with him on a series of things, she says. But I think people would say he respects human rights and has a strong moral compass. And thats not something that I am confident that we can say about Donald Trump. Ultimately, Trumps ever-shifting policy whims dont dictate what conservative women believe. And despite the identity crises, Lahren says now is a pivotal time for right-of-center women. Now, our first female president can be someone thats not scandal-ridden. Can be someone that didnt have a rap sheet a mile long. Can be someone that was not investigated by the FBI, she says. So I think its actually an exciting moment for women."
"36""When I was 13, I started wearing hijab. I had always loved swimming but had to give it up until my mother bought some Lycra fabric from Lincraft and sewed me a fluorescent pink-and-blue two-piece wetsuit with a matching swimming cap. The local pools refused to admit me wearing the suit but I was free to go to the beach. So go to the beach I did.   Related: Why we wear the burkini: five women on dressing modestly at the beach    And yet the feeling that I belonged at the beach, that it was a public space in which I was in place, sometimes eluded me. The belief that the beach is open to all runs deep in Australia. Wendy Garden, the curator of last years art exhibition On the Beach, wrote that beaches occupied a privileged place in the national psyche. The beach is seen as a great equaliser, where racial, social and gender differences are subordinate to the common pursuit of pleasure in the surf and sun. But like many of our public spaces, the iconic space of the Australian beach has always privileged a white sensory landscape. What looks and feels and sounds and smells as though it belongs is a function of power relations. Since last summer, events in Europe have sharpened potential conflicts over who and what belongs on the beach. After the terrorist attack in Nice in May, French mayors banned women from wearing burkinis on the beach in dozens of resorts and promised to defy a court ruling that the bans were illegal. At least one women was fined by police for not wearing an outfit deemed to respect good morals and secularism.      Wearing hijab in the Mediterranean: after the terrorist attack in Nice in May, French mayors banned women from wearing burkinis on the beach in dozens of resorts. Photograph: Baz Ratner/Reuters    No such legal moves have been seriously proposed for Australian beaches but the climate is far from relaxed.  Speaking to Muslim women from diverse walks of life about their relationship with the beach, what is striking is how their bodies, specifically their dress, have become the dominant site for contests over what is considered in place and out of place on Australian beaches. Whether it be a hijab over a rash vest and activewear leggings, or the burkini, it seems that the Muslimness of this form of dress has the capacity to provoke wary and sometimes hostile reactions. Many of the women I spoke to had a sense that their burkinis and hijabs were considered out of place. The staring, the double looks, the raised eyebrows.    Related: Who belongs on the Australian beach? A history of gendered and racial possession    Its this feeling that the beach and hijab dont mix, says Sarah, a 28-year-old lawyer (all interviewees asked for full names to be withheld). People are locked into thinking theres only one way to dress and enjoy the beach. Samah laughs when she tells me that before owning a burkini, she wore tights, a long shirt and hijab to swim in and lay on the sand. One time a guy looked at me while we were in the water, she recounts. He shook his head with pity and said, Isnt it a shame you cant enjoy the sun? I laughed it off and responded that I was enjoying the sun.  Mind you, the guy was wearing a long-sleeve rashie and swim cap. I had more skin exposed than he did! Growing up in Queensland, the beach has always been part of Aishas life. But when she started wearing hijab, she says she stopped feeling comfortable because of how people would stare. She opted for secluded beaches despite her concerns about swimming in places with no flags or lifeguards. It was the only way I could feel at ease to swim, she says.   Related: I created the burkini to give women freedom, not to take it away | Aheda Zanetti    For some the beach has become the opposite of the peculiarly relaxed space of Australian myth. Hana, a 25-year-old journalist, was on the northern beaches of Sydney last month and interpreted the stares she received as a kind of disgust that questioned her right even to be on the beach. She says she decided against wearing her burkini and watered down her outfit of swimming cap, black tights with board shorts on top and long-sleeve rash vest, to make it less confronting. I can go anywhere in Australia and I feel so comfortable, she says, but the beach is the one place that I am fearful of because of the reaction I always receive. The norms and rules that have been allowed to dominate Australian beaches mean a bathing suit is internalised as natural, much in the same way that in India it is perfectly natural for women to wear saris and swim in the ocean. In Egypt, women jump into the Mediterranean wearing their hijabs or niqabs without issue. Another women, Az, says it is not the job of Muslim women to prove they belong on Australian beaches. What is needed is to hold the mirror up to society and understand why we deem some forms of dress acceptable and others unacceptable. Yet many Muslim women do struggle to overcome the attitudes of others. Sana spent years on what she describes as a journey of confidence-building to wear a burkini at the beach. For years she chose not to wear it because she grew up with a feeling that only people who dress and look a certain way have claim to the beach. The beach is a space which, due to so many societal factors, is synonymous with whiteness, blond-haired, sunburnt-white skin and definitely not fully dressed women.   Related: Frances burkini ban exposes the hypocrisy of its secularist state | Iman Amrani    This is about much more than bikinis v burkinis. Muslim women are particularly aware that what they wear on the beach and how they behave can be used as ammunition for wider culture wars about a mythical Australian way of life and Aussie values. Anisa is married with three children and her concerns about being a hijabi at the beach have deepened since the French bans. Some women are brave and dont care, she says, but I feel so self-conscious and as though people are judging me and my husband because hes wearing appropriate swimwear whereas I am fully covered.  You can almost feel how they are viewing us as this controlling Muslim man and his poor oppressed wife  if only they knew the real dynamics! A cultural studies professor, Suvendini Perera, has argued that veiling has become the ultimate marker of cultural difference and that the veiled Muslim women is a kind of limit-figure for the nation in the values debate.  It is the awareness that their bodies are repositories for other peoples narratives and stereotypes that burdens all the women I spoke to. And yet many Muslim women resist the negative responses of others to lay claim to their beach space. Abs tells me she self-counsels herself: I constantly tell myself not to care what others are thinking of my appearance. This self-counselling empowers me to enjoy myself and my time with my children.  Samar is just as resolved to ignore the stares and weird looks and rock the burkini when Im swimming.  For Layla, for whom the beach washes away stress and anxiety, presumptions that she cannot swim and is weighed down by her burkini only make her laugh. Its not simply that these women use the beach in spite of being positioned as out of place. They seek to redefine out of place, challenging dominant assumptions and sensory reactions to their presence.  Laylas relationship with the beach has evolved from a site of resistance to the staring and comments, to a place which she says she has trained myself to think of as my space too."
"37""Its pretty easy to conjure an idea of a Canadian. As one young paramour looking to marry an American told a dating website: She must be willing to become a hockey fan and eat maple syrup and Beaver Tails in my igloo. Theres more to the stereotype, of course. Canadas universal health care and gun-control legislation are frequently namechecked by American politicians (often disapprovingly), while the countrys adventurers have a long-standing tradition of stitching tiny Canadian flags into their backpacks. But while some of these cliches are true  Tim Hortons really does sell more of its hot brown drink (they call it coffee) than any other restaurant chain  a deep dive into the actual statistics suggest that much of the countrys image is just that.  Some of the most common misconceptions about Canada include:      Canadas most popular sport by far is ice hockey What football is to Brazil, hockey is Canada, right? Between them, the mens and women national Canadian ice hockey teams won seven of a possible eight gold medals at the last four Winter Olympics.  But while Canadas superiority on the ice remains unchecked, the sport itself is becoming a little more niche at home. A 2014 study pegged ice hockey fourth among 3-to-17-year-old Canadians in participation numbers, behind swimming, soccer and dance. Its probably no coincidence that hockey was also ranked the second most expensive sport to play, and that multiculturalism means a generation of kids less uniformly passionate about pucks. Meanwhile, the rest of the world is catching up to Canada when it comes to playing the sport professionally: 2015 marked the first time in 98 years when Canadians did not make up the majority of National Hockey League players.      Canadians live in the wilderness Pierre Berton once declared: A Canadian is somebody who knows how to make love in a canoe. But there are a few problems with this all-Canadian adage, beyond the obvious issue of tipping. For one, Berton never actually said it. For another, the image of Canadians as a wilderness-dwelling people is not borne out by research: as of 2011, a full 81% of Canadians resided in a population centre, census speak for urban area.  In fact, about 35.2%, or one in three Canadians, lives in either Toronto, Montreal or Vancouver alone.  And if you think the vast majority Canadas city-dwellers love nothing more than to race to the countryside, youd also be wrong: a 2010 poll found that only 23% of Canadians see their ideal vacation as a visit to a cottage or a lake.       Canadians are taxed to death The status of Canada as something of a socialist darling leads many to assume that Canadians pay income tax rates at similar levels to those in, for example, France or Germany.  Not so, according to the OECDs annual Taxing Wages report. The report ranks Canada 25th out of 34 countries in terms of its tax wedge for single-income earners (a measure of the difference between labour costs to the employer and the corresponding net take-home pay of the employee). By this metric,, Canada is actually slightly below the US.  In the same report, Canada ranked 14th out of 34 in terms of income tax, based on the average national wage. When it comes to corporate taxes, too, Canada is relatively generous the headline corporate tax rate has dropped from 34% in 2007 to 26.5% in 2015, ranking Canada 61st in the world. By comparison, the US ranks fourth.      Canadians are obsessed with beer There are few images more Canadian than beloved SCTV hosers Bob and Doug McKenzie sitting on a couch and cracking open a few bottles of Molson Canadian while complaining about US-style twist-off caps. The Beer Hunter, an all-Canadian take on Russian Roulette, has long been the nations greatest drinking game. But while it is true that Canadians love beer  they spent C$15.7bn on the stuff in 2011 an increasing number are embracing wine as their drink of choice. As a 2015 report notes, Beer sales as a share of the total sale of alcoholic beverages have been declining for several years. In 2004/2005, the report continued, beer had a market share of 49% in terms of dollar value, while wine had a market share of 25%. By 2013/2014, the market share for beer had declined to 42%, while wine was up to 31%.      Canada is a haven for pot smokers  Since snowboarder Ross Rebagliati went on the Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 1998 to celebrate the return of his Olympic gold medal after it had been stripped from him because of THC in his blood, Canada has garnered a reputation as weed-smoking haven. The 2001 ruling of an Ontario court that prohibiting the medical use of marijuana was unconstitutional did little to shake that impression. But although Justin Trudeaus Liberal government promised to table legislation to legalise marijuana in 2017, Canadas medical community and popular opinion are divided on the question, and there are diplomatic hurdles still to clear. Even if weed is eventually made legal, it will likely be sold in set quantities, possibly from government stores, and subject to significant taxes. In fact, the North American nation that has made the biggest strides in legalising pot has been the supposedly drug-averse US.      Canadian hospital wait times are so bad they flee to the US for care During the 9 October presidential debate, Donald Trump raised some ire north of the border when he referred to Canadian healthcare as catastrophic. Said the now-president-elect: Youve noticed the Canadians. When they need a big operation, they come into the US in many cases, because their system is so slow. As ever, Trump is manipulating the truth. Canadians do endure long wait times for specialised treatment, and as of 2014 Canada ranked last among 11 OECD countries in terms of how quickly patients can get an appointment with their family doctor.  However, Canadians arent flocking en masse to the US in response. A Fraser Institute report revealed that in 2015 just 1% of Canadians who needed specialised medical treatment sought that treatment in the US.       Canada is a major exporter of comedy stars Dan Aykroyd, Martin Short, Eugene Levy, Catherine OHara, Lorne Michaels, Jim Carrey, Mike Myers, Dave Foley. All are Canadians who made it big in America  and all are over 50. Whereas comedians were once regularly discovered on shows such as Saturday Night Live, SCTV and Kids in the Hall, the well has been drying up: the success of Seth Rogen, Jay Baruchel and Ryan Reynolds is heartening, but Canada is no longer the comedy source it once was. Though tightened screening at the US border may be partly to blame, the changing way in which we consume comedy  bite-sized clips shared online, from acts such as Picnicface and Baronness Von Sketch Show  also plays a role. The old model of a breakout US/Canadian TV sketch comedy may no longer exist, says Toronto Second Citys Etan Muskat: The CBC is trying to have breakout mainstream comedic success, following a model that doesnt compute.       Canada is a frigid wasteland Canada is cold, eh? It has an average daily temperature of -5.6C, making it one of the chilliest countries on earth. But the idea of an average Canadian daily temperature is meaningless. Not only does it combine cities like Regina and St Johns  thousands of miles apart, in entirely different climates  but it doesnt capture range.  Canadas summer highs are in fact often equal to, or higher than, other major cities in Europe and the US. Winnipeg, for example, which suffers average annual winter highs of -12.7, has a summer average high of 25.8, higher than Paris and Los Angeles.  Canada also has a rich summer culture of cabin or cottage-going to rival the Scandinavians and the dacha-loving Russians. If anything, the brutal winters make Canadians appreciate the summer months more.       Canadas economy is driven by natural resources Though Canada is the biggest exporter of crude oil to the US and the highest exporter of forestry products relative to imports, the forestry, fishing, mining, quarrying, oil and gas industries collectively employ only 355,000 Canadians, or 2% of the workforce. In fact, Canadas services sector dwarfs the goods-producing sector by almost four to one. And the third-biggest service employer after retail and healthcare/social services is professional, scientific and technical services, including tech startups like Shopify, Hootsuite and Freshbooks. In 2015, Canadas tech companies produced $117bn or 7.1% of Canadas economic output, greater than that of the finance and insurance industry. As Mike McDerment, CEO of Freshbooks, notes: Its our observation that the economy is being restructured away from resource economy to services and tech.      Canada is a Scandinavian-style social democracy Though Canada enjoys a strong healthcare system and is consistently ranked among the most livable countries on earth, many assume it is a thriving social democracy in the style of Sweden or Denmark. Not exactly.  Canadian bachelors students pay the joint 2nd highest tuition fees of OECD countries, alongside Japanese and Korean students. Canada also has the 7th highest child poverty rate in the OECD, and, as of 2013, was last in spending on early childhood education and is among the most expensive countries on earth when it comes to childcare costs.  Meanwhile Canadas rich-poor gap is slightly bigger than the OECD average, and the World Economic Forum put Canada in 30th place globally  two spots below the US  in gender equality measures.      Canada is diverse from coast to coast The Economist recently pointed out that Canada is a world leader in immigration, both in acceptance and integration, a result of 1971 legislation enshrining multiculturalism. However, most of the resulting diversity is limited to Canadas big cities. Of Canadas 6.8 millions immigrants in 2011, 91% lived in one of Canadas 33 census metropolitan areas (CMAs)  Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver  compared with 63.3% of people who were born in Canada. Across the country, skilled immigrants struggle with significant barriers to finding work, such as language and requirements for Canadian experience. In Vancouver and Toronto, many immigrants are increasingly living in inner suburban enclaves, with less access to public transport. At least one geographer, Zach Taylor, argues the isolation and resentment these enclaves can cause helped fuel the populist rise of Toronto mayor Rob Ford."
"38""  12.18am GMT    Ten notable women's marches from across the country    Washington, DC   s March and rally to protest President Donald J. Trump the day after he was sworn in as the 45th President of the United States.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Thousands of people on Pennsylvania Avenue participate in the women March and rally to protest President Donald J. Trump the day after he was sworn in as the 45th President of the United States. Photograph: Michael Reynolds/EPA    One million people marched in the historic women March on Washington on Saturday, according to initial estimates, in a stunning show of protest on the first full day of the Trump administration. A sea of peaceful protesters wore pink pussyhats as crowds poured into the streets of downtown DC, easily outnumbering those attending the inauguration on Friday. Celebrity performers and speakers included singers Alicia Keys, Madonna and Janelle Mone, activists Gloria Steinem and Angela Davis and actors America Ferrera and Ashley Judd. Los Angeles   s March in protest after the inauguration of President Donald Trump.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Tens of thousands of people took to the streets of Downtown Los Angeles for the women March in protest after the inauguration of President Donald Trump. Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images    The LAPD estimates 500,000 people took to the streets of Los Angeles, although event organizers say the number of protesters was even higher, according to the LA Times. It is reportedly the highest turnout for any rally in the city for at least a decade. Chicago   s March on January 21, 2017 in Chicago, Illinois.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  William Rosen looks over protesters as they participate in the women March on January 21, 2017 in Chicago, Illinois. Photograph: John Gress/Getty Images    Chicago, Illinois saw a huge turn out, with estimates of 250,000 people. The actual march itself was cancelled due to the huge crowds, turning the event into a rally that spilled out of Grant Park. New York   s March to protest the election of Donald Trump as President of the United States on January 21, 2017 in New York City.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Massive crowds march past Grand Central Station on 42nd Street during the women March to protest the election of Donald Trump as President of the United States on January 21, 2017 in New York City. Photograph: UPI / Barcroft Images    Around 200,000 New Yorkers rallied in Midtown Manhattan, double the number of protesters had estimated. The marchers, who had to be staggered in waves because of the numbers, headed up Fifth Avenue towards Trump Tower. Whats at stake is everything you believe in, said actor Whoopi Goldberg told the crowd. Atlanta   s inauguration.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Thousands of people marched through Atlanta one day after President Donald Trumps inauguration. Photograph: John Bazemore/AP    Thousands turned out for a social justice march in Atlanta, Georgia, with civil rights hero and congressman John Lewis telling the crowd to never quit never give up and to get into good trouble. I know something about marching, he said at the end of his remarks, then the civil rights legend shook hands as he made his way to the front of the march. Denver   s new president, Donald Trump.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Hundreds of thousands of people packed the streets across the US on Saturday in a massive outpouring of defiant opposition to Americas new president, Donald Trump. Photograph: Jason Connolly/AFP/Getty Images    An estimated 100,000 people in Denver turned up to protest at the Civic Center, chanting love not hate makes America great. Phoenix   s March on Washington Saturday, Jan. 21, 2017, in Phoenix.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Thousands of demonstrators march in support of the women March on Washington Saturday, Jan. 21, 2017, in Phoenix. Photograph: Ross D. Franklin/AP    A march that started at the Arizona State Capitol and paraded through the streets of Phoenix, Arizon attracted 20,000 people, according to an estimate by the Arizona Department of Public Safety. I am amazed at the turnout, especially in a red state on a rainy day, the interim chair for progressive political organization Stronger Together AZ, told local media.  Boston   s March for America.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Demonstrators gather on Boston Common during the Boston women March for America. Photograph: Maddie Meyer/Getty Images    More than 100,000 protesters crowded into the Boston Commons, including Senator Elizabeth Warren, one of the fiercest criticisms of Donald Trump. We can whimper. We can whine. Or we can fight back! she declared to the crowd, reports the Boston Globe. Oakland   s march.\" width=\"500\" height=\"300\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Festive mood as thousands turn out to the Oakland women march. Photograph: Julia Carrie Wong    In Oakland, California 60,000 people took to the streets for the local women march, with hundreds also rallying in neighboring Berkeley. Austin   s March.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Protesters march down Congress Street in Austin as they take part in the Austin women March. Photograph: C Sacco/ddp USA/Barcroft Images    In Austin, the liberal capital of Texas, police estimated 50,000 people turned out for the local women march, 20,000 more than organizers had expected.       10.09pm GMT       From the women march in Atlanta, Georgia:     Dianna Settles, on the right, with a print she made at her Atlanta, Georgia store. Photograph: Jamiles Lartey    Dianna Settles owns a store downtown where she has a letterpress, pressed this design for free for anyone going to a women march. I was looking for a quote that was encouraging but also unwavering, she said.       10.06pm GMT       A march in Springfield, Missouri:    @ambiej Springfield Missouri March! pic.twitter.com/dNyZI6SbEB&mdash; NastyMcT aka Laura T (@NastyMcT) January 21, 2017         10.04pm GMT    Marchers boo at the Trump hotel in DC     s March on Washington marchers outside the Trump Hotel\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  women March on Washington marchers outside the Trump Hotel Photograph: Molly Redden    In DC, the march spilled beyond the mall and took over much of downtown, with throngs of people marching down major arteries of the city a mile north of the official route.  Cars are honking in support or annoyance. On Pennsylvania Ave, cheers and boos erupt loudest as groups march past the hotel Trump has developed in the old post office.       10.00pm GMT       This might cause some family drama...    Among the men at the #womenMarch: Joshua Kushner, brother of White House senior adviser Jared. (Photo by @jsidman.) pic.twitter.com/FtALNYlvvF&mdash; Benjamin Freed (@brfreed) January 21, 2017         9.59pm GMT       Best chants of the marches, as heard by our reporters:  We want a leader, not a creepy tweeter Cant build a wall - hands too small Hes orange, hes gross, he lost the popular vote     &quot;This is not fake news&quot; #womenmarch pic.twitter.com/ZbzfXhQQSb&mdash; Paul Owen (@PaulTOwen) January 21, 2017    Have you heard others? Add them in the comments!       9.47pm GMT    No arrests or police incidents at women's march    DC police tell the Guardian there have been no arrests or incidents at the women March on Washington today. Earlier today, Bill Miller, the public information officer for the US Attorneys Office for the District of Columbia, released a statement that AOs office is continuing to evaluate charges against approximately 230 adults who were arrested in protests and clashes in the nations capital around the time of Trumps inaugural parade yesterday.  Wrote Miller:  We expect that most of those arrested will be charged by our office with felony rioting, (D.C. Official Code 22-1322), an offense punishable by a statutory maximum of 10 years in prison and a fine of up to $25,000.   Those arrested will face hearings at the Superior Court of the District of Columbia today.        9.40pm GMT    Video: Amy Schumer and Madonna at DC march                   9.16pm GMT    Oakland march: 'yesterday was dark but today the sun is coming out    Over to the west coast, with Julia Carrie Wong attending the Oakland women march:    Festive atmosphere at Oakland women&#39;s march pic.twitter.com/6qjTskhKcQ&mdash; Julia Carrie Wong (@juliacarriew) January 21, 2017    The atmosphere was festive at the Oakland women march, where organizers estimated several tens of thousands of people took to the streets Saturday morning. Yesterday may have been a dark day for a lot of people, but today is just about the sun coming out, said Tracie Noriega, an educator from Union City who marched with her daughter. Its hope. You need to find some optimism.    &quot;Yesterday may have been a dark day, but today is just about the sun coming out.&quot; - Tracie Noriega with daughter Tarin #womenMarchOakland pic.twitter.com/t5z9z9ZISU&mdash; Julia Carrie Wong (@juliacarriew) January 21, 2017    A city with a strong protest culture, the march drew many first time marchers from around the Bay Area.Teresa Medina, a first time protester from Pittsburgh, California, marched with a sorority sister from Sigma Lamda Gamma.    &quot;I&#39;m out here just to take a stand against all the hate Trump has beenprojecting out&quot; - Teresa Medina #womenMarchOakland pic.twitter.com/38fJ39pqTv&mdash; Julia Carrie Wong (@juliacarriew) January 21, 2017    Im out here just to take a stand against all the hate Trump has been projecting out, Medina said, adding that Trumps disrespect for Mexican immigrants was very upsetting for her, since her mother is Mexican.We fought so hard not to be stereotyped, she said. To see other people agree with Trump was hurtful.Another first time protester, Z Wolt of San Leandro, said she was disgusted with Trump.Hes diminishing everyone. Hes diminishing American values, she said.But the Ethiopian immigrant said that she was thrilled to take part in the womens March.Im so proud, she said. I feel very connected to everyone here, like we are all one.       9.12pm GMT             video\"            data-video-provider=\"AP\"            >    People around the world protest in support of women March on Washington         9.11pm GMT       From Guardian US deputy head of news, Paul Owen, taken near the White House at the DC march:    A low blow... #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/6grRVI7IGv&mdash; Paul Owen (@PaulTOwen) January 21, 2017      &quot;Women are perfect&quot; #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/tcycGYoAY8&mdash; Paul Owen (@PaulTOwen) January 21, 2017      #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/Lls72x3JMK&mdash; Paul Owen (@PaulTOwen) January 21, 2017      &quot;Hi Mom&quot; #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/AxqAdKddIl&mdash; Paul Owen (@PaulTOwen) January 21, 2017      Updated at 9.23pm GMT     9.01pm GMT       From the NYC march:    I&#39;ve lived in &amp; around NYC my entire life &amp; I&#39;ve never seen it like this. #womenmarchnyc pic.twitter.com/f377sUew0w&mdash; Michael H. Weber (@thisisweber) January 21, 2017      Otis, 4. Her dad: &quot;She matters and its important she knows and knows other people feel the same.&quot; #WMNYC pic.twitter.com/f6T2abjhHh&mdash; Brandy Zadrozny (@BrandyZadrozny) January 21, 2017         8.57pm GMT    The other women's marches: from Boston to the Bahamas    While the biggest US marches of the day (beyond Washington) are taking place in cities such as Chicago and Los Angeles, plenty of smaller events are under way, too: From elsewhere on the east coast...            Women&#39;s March in Ocean City, MD USA   Over 600 people marched in Ocean City, MD to protest the incoming administration.        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  Anne Knab   21 January 2017, 13:10       ...to way out west:           Much larger crowd than the 3,000 expected today in Phoenix AZ   Cold and wind is not holding this crowd back        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  Dave Kinney   21 January 2017, 12:06       Plus, a large gathering in Detroit:           Detroit Sister March       Sent via GuardianWitness    By  Catherine Krenek   21 January 2017, 12:29       And in Boston:            Not just Washington March   100,000 people on Boston Common listening to Senator Elizabeth Warren. Trump would go crazy at all the nasty things being said about him!        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  ID5609147   21 January 2017, 13:11       Pink hats, pink houses, same difference, right?           In The Bahamas Too   Small group of concerned world citizens on an island in the Northern Bahamas showing their solidarity with the marchers in Washington.        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  lespierres   21 January 2017, 12:44       If youre marching today, tell us about it. Share your photos and stories, via GuardianWitness.       8.45pm GMT       Donald Trump just spoke at CIA headquarters in nearby Langley, Virginia, just outside of DC, however did not mention the hundreds of thousands of women marching against him across the country and world today. He did, however, note how big his inauguration crowd was yesterday.    Photos taken at 12:15 p.m. ET each day show Trump&#39;s inauguration crowd vs. the #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/OG61rjQdqd&mdash; CNN (@CNN) January 21, 2017    Yep, the smaller crowd is from Trumps inauguration.       8.35pm GMT    Video: Janelle Mone says 'choose freedom over fear'                   8.33pm GMT       Five hours after speeches first began, they are finally wrapping up the DC rally. The speakers and musical performers were supposed to finish at 1pm, so the march as at least two and a half hours behind schedule.  The march is still going ahead.       8.33pm GMT       From the women march in Atlanta, Georgia:     Anti-Trump protests, Atlanta, USA - 20 Jan 2017 Photograph: ZUMA Wire/REX/Shutterstock    Congressman John Lewis addressed the protest crowd in his home district to raucous cheers of we love John and district five! (a reference to his congressional district). He encouraged the crowd to never quit never give up and to get into good trouble.  I know something about marching he said at the end of his remarks, then the civil rights legend shook hands as he made his way to the front of the march.    &quot;I want not one step back to be trending, tag the #POTUS&quot; pic.twitter.com/jyq22UC05q&mdash; Jamiles Lartey (@JamilesLartey) January 21, 2017      Updated at 8.34pm GMT     8.13pm GMT             video\"            data-video-provider=\"Reuters/AP\"            >    Aerial footage shows thousands at women marches around the US         8.03pm GMT       Madonna now singing her 1994 hit Human Nature, she dedicates it to Donald Trump. She gets the crowd to sing along with her:  Im not your bitch Dont hang your shit on me Donald Trump suck a dick        8.01pm GMT    Video: Alicia Keys sings 'Girl on Fire'                   7.56pm GMT    Madonna: 'welcome to the revolution of love'       Madonna Photograph: Kevin Mazur/Getty Images for Brooklyn Museum    Another surprise celebrity guest! Singer Madonna just came out to speak. Are you ready to shake up the world? Welcome to the revolution of love. To the rebellion. To our refusal as women to accept this new age of tyranny, where not just women are endangered but all marginalized people, says Madonna. It took this horrific moment of darkness to wake us the fuck up, she declares. It seems as though we had all slipped into a false sense of comfort. That justice would prevail, that good will win in the end. Well, good did not win this election but good will win in the end. Today marks the beginning of our story. The revolution starts here. The fight for the right to be free to be who we are to be equal. Lets march together through this darkness and with each step know that we are not afraid, that we are not alone, that we will not back down. To our detractors who insist that this march will never add up to anything: fuck you, she declares. Yes I am angry. Yes I have thought a lot about blowing up the White House. But that wont change anything, adds Madonna. She then busts out into her hit Express Yourself.              Updated at 9.15pm GMT     7.44pm GMT        s March on Washington\" width=\"800\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Laila Abdelziz at the women March on Washington Photograph: Molly Redden    Laila Abdelziz on why shes marching in DC today:   [Im] here to stand in solidarity with my friends and fellow Nation friends and women. Ive been a political activist and community organizer my whole life. Im Palestinian, Im a refugee. Im Russian. Im Muslim. Im a women. I care about radically transforming communities to make them healthier and safer. Ive grown up all over this country. Inequality is increasing dramatically and I see it in my community every day.  She was born in Palestine, came to Baltimore as a refugee.   Trump started the movement to identify refugees as a threat. To associate politically and culturally and socially people who have been abandoned by every safety net in their societies and have absolutely nowhere to go. Being someone who knows what that feels like, being the first world where theres so much wealth, I know that we have an obligation to just be human to one another. And I dont think were meeting that obligation. At a time where there are more displaced people than ever in history.        7.34pm GMT    NYC women's march attracts thousands     s inauguration.\" width=\"800\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  People protest near Grand Central Station in Manhattan, New York following Donald Trumps inauguration. Photograph: Wendy Orr for the Guardian    Tens of thousands of New Yorkers marched to Trump Tower in Midtown Manhattan for New Yorks women march, with many local politicians speaking out about Donald Trump.    Huge amount of people out for #womenMarchNYC. Police let traffic thru at 42nd and Lex pic.twitter.com/yxypol12nI&mdash; Nicole Puglise (@nicolepuglise) January 21, 2017     s inauguration.\" width=\"800\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  People protest on 42nd street in Manhattan, New York in response to Donald Trumps inauguration. Photograph: Wendy Orr for the Guardian     s March in New York, NY.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Actor Helen Mirren joined the women March in New York, NY. Photograph: Kerry Eustice for the Guardian      And 42nd Street is a sea of people.#womenMarch #womenmarchnyc pic.twitter.com/tQnEuUHZDR&mdash; Bill Canacci (@billcanacci) January 21, 2017      Scenes/signs from the #womenMarchNYC this morning. Still ongoing pic.twitter.com/jxy9gHTCjY&mdash; Nicole Puglise (@nicolepuglise) January 21, 2017    The signs today are so great, this one is also worth a special mention:    Best. Sign. Ever. #womenMarch #womenmarchnyc #sobadevenintrovertsarehere pic.twitter.com/TmJydvooqu&mdash; Susan Kaufman (@skaufman4050) January 21, 2017      Updated at 7.38pm GMT     7.25pm GMT       The march will still be going ahead, says organizers. You may have read a story that says we are not marching. I am here to tell you we are marching and we are going to use Constitution Avenue, said a women march organizer.       7.21pm GMT       At the Atlanta march, congressman and civil rights leader John Lewis took to the stage. The crowd chants we love John, thank you John and district five, a reference to Lewis district that Donald Trump insulted last week by calling it falling apart (the Guardian went there this week and found affluent neighborhoods).       7.16pm GMT       Janelle Mone leading a powerful call-and-response with the Mothers of the Movement, in her song Hell You Talmbout, with the mothers calling out their childrens names and the corwd chanting back say his name.   Trans activist Cherno Biko is also on stage, chanting the names of black trans women who have been killed.       7.08pm GMT    Video: Scarlett Johansson speaks at march                   7.05pm GMT       The Associated Press reports that so many protesters turned out in DC that a formal march cannot go ahead.  A massive turnout at the women March on Washington has forced a change of plans. With the entire planned route filled with hundreds of thousands of protesters, organizers cant lead a formal march toward the White House. Thats according to a District of Columbia official, speaking on condition of anonymity because the official isnt authorized to speak for the march.  But the organizers of the march keep leading chants about marching and note they will soon march and shut Washington down once the final performers and speakers have performed.       7.02pm GMT       Singer Janelle Mone takes the stage, saying her grandmother was a sharecropper and her mother was a janitor. It was women that gave you Dr Martin Luther King Jr. It was women who gave you Malcolm X. And according to the bible, it was a women who gave you Jesus, said Mone.    Updated at 7.10pm GMT     6.57pm GMT       Surprise guest singer Alicia Keys comes out and starts quoting from Maya Angelous Still I Rise poem.  Then begins belting out her hit This Girl is on Fire, changing the lyrics to these girls are on fire.       6.53pm GMT       Reports that Chicago is the second biggest women march after the DC event.    the aerials out of chicago #womenmarch are something else pic.twitter.com/ucvwtVzYM5&mdash; Christina Manduley (@cmanduley) January 21, 2017         6.47pm GMT    Rain doesn't keep away crowds for Atlanta's women's march    From reporter Jamiles Lartey in Atlanta, Georgia:    Simply massive crowd gathering at the Atlanta center for civil and human rights despite a cold, soaking rain all morning. pic.twitter.com/EXB9o6V1My&mdash; Jamiles Lartey (@JamilesLartey) January 21, 2017    A morning of steady soaking rain gave way just around 1 pm, the scheduled start of Atlantas March for social justice and women.  Already a large crowd in the thousands had begun to filter in with rain ponchos umbrellas and signs reading rape is not presidential and hate does not make America great. The crowd rapidly exceeded the confines of the citys civil and human rights center, spreading out into the surrounding streets.     Hidden Figures making a cameo appearance #Atlantamarch pic.twitter.com/OpjKuD5BZV&mdash; Jamiles Lartey (@JamilesLartey) January 21, 2017    I just had to come out and be heard that this is not normal, said denominator Carla Neal. Over 55 civil rights and social justice organizations made up the coalition putting on the march. Around 1:20pm the first event speakers took the podium to address the crowd ahead of the march heading off for the Georgia state capitol building.    &quot;Hug somebody, make a friend.&quot; Atmosphere is very loving out here. pic.twitter.com/XZK6lM3ry3&mdash; Jamiles Lartey (@JamilesLartey) January 21, 2017         6.40pm GMT       From solidarity women marches from around the world, via GuardianWitness:       Amsterdam   As an immigrant, gay, white man married to a mixed-race man, with an immigrant disabled son, I recognise that my family is under threat from Trump and those like him.   I am marching because politics is always about identity, and because one human&#39;s rights are another human&#39;s rights, and because being straight, male and American is neither qualification nor achievement  nor does it make you right.      Sent via GuardianWitness    By  grc6761   21 January 2017, 9:43                Leeds solidarity Women&#39;s March against Darth Trump   The solidarity march in Leeds had a surprisingly big turnout, probably close to 1000 people. For me, this photo of my friend says it all - how long women have been fighting Trump&#39;s brand of misogyny and entitlement, and how it is more important than ever that we continue to fight the rise of hatred in all its forms.        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  F Stevens   21 January 2017, 9:54            6.37pm GMT    Video: Kamala Harris addresses the crowd                   6.36pm GMT       Some sweet marchers at the DC event:  s March on Washington\">   Attendees at the women March on Washington        6.34pm GMT       March organizers Tamika D Mallory, Linda Sarsour and Carmen Perez take to the stage to talk about intersectional feminism, and note that while many white women have only become politically energized and angry because of this election, many women of color have been oppressed and fighting politically for years. Mallory talks about how for many white women the election has made them feel like how black women have felt their whole lives. For some of you it is new, for others of us it is not so new at all, she declares, before listing the names of black people whove been killed by police or while in police custody or because of racial violence - Sandra Bland, Philando Castile, Michael Brown, Trayvon Martin. Put your pride aside, and stand up for the most marginalized people in this society. because if you stand for them, you stand for all, says Mallory. Dr King said I will not remember the harsh words of my enemies, I will remember the silence of my friends, declares Mallory.       6.27pm GMT        s March on Washington in Washington, DC.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  People gather along Independence Ave for the women March on Washington in Washington, DC. Photograph: Tracie Van Auken/EPA    Nothing like a little neighborly love, eh? Allegra Fulton bussed in from Toronto with a band of women who call themselves the Nasty Women of the North. They waved pink flags and wore matching kitten beanies. We dont live here but America lives in us, you know? Fulton said. She didnt have time for a long chat as they marched through the crowd getting mobbed by women expressing gratitude for the support of their neighbors. Youre all welcome, one of the Canadian women said. I love Trudeau, a women squealed as they passed, referring to Canadas prime minister Justin Trudeau, an avowed feminist.       6.20pm GMT       Actress Scarlett Johansson calls on people to not be dispirited by the election of Trump. Let this weight not drag you down, but help to get your heels stuck in, she declares. She speaks passionately about women health, declaring that politicians and pharmaceutical companies shouldnt be involved in a women medical decision.  She calls on people to volunteer and donate to women health organizations.       6.06pm GMT       Former Secretary of State John Kerry joins the march in DC.    JOHN KERRY joins the #womenMarch (with his dog). pic.twitter.com/RvIqLG1yrZ&mdash; Sabrina Siddiqui (@SabrinaSiddiqui) January 21, 2017         6.04pm GMT          Pope Francis reaches for a letter and t-shirt from Sophie Cruz, 5, of suburban Los Angeles, during a parade in Washington, Wednesday, Sept. 23, 2015. Photograph: Alex Brandon/AP    Sophie Cruz, the 6-year-old who hit the headlines after giving a letter to the Pope calling for her parents not to be deported, takes to the stage with her family:  We are here together making a chain of love to protect our families. Let us fight with love, faith and courage so that our families will not be destroyed. I also want to tell the children not to be afraid, because we are not alone. There are still many people that have their hearts filled with love and tenderness to snuggle in this path of life. Lets keep together and fight for the rights. God is with us.  She reread the speech in Spanish and then leads a chant of si se puede.    Updated at 6.07pm GMT     5.58pm GMT    Tammy Duckworth: 'I didn't shed blood for the constitution to be trampled on'       Senator Tammy Duckworth (D-IL) carries her daughter Abigail during the opening day of the 115th Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington. Photograph: Joshua Roberts/Reuters    Senator from Illinois Tammy Duckworth, an Iraq War army veteran who lost both her legs during her service, took to the stage I didnt shed blood for this country, I didnt give up literally parts of my body to have the constitution trampled on... We did not serve to protect the constitution to have them roll back our rights, says Duckworth. Duckworth notes how rolling back the American with Disabilities Act would dramatically affect the disabled community and that she wouldnt be alive without it. I just sat through two weeks of senate hearings... of people who forget they have millions of dollars in the Cayman Islands... people who dont know if theres a safe amount of lead to be in your drinking supply, she announces, bemoaning Trumps cabinet picks.       5.48pm GMT       Video: Michael Moore call Congress every day                 5.45pm GMT        s March on Washington\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Dr Chioma Ndubisi at the women March on Washington Photograph: Molly Redden    Dr Chiona Ndubisi works in a New York hospital and came down withmembers of her hospitals family planning department.  In the weeks since Trumps election, many women have asked her what will happen totheir birth control coverage.  Its a lot of questions about whats next, said Ndubisi.  She held a sign saying Pussy Power decorated with packs of birth control. I saw a sign that said, Too many issues for one sign, she said. Thats exactly how I feel. Well take it one step at a time. This is a moment to inspire others to act.       5.38pm GMT        s March on Washington\" width=\"500\" height=\"300\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Kamala Harris at the women March on Washington Photograph: TV screengrab    Female politicians are en masse on the stage at the DC march and California Senator Kamala Harris addresses the crowd. I believe we are at inflection point in the history of our country. I believe it is a moment in time that is a pivotal moment in the history of our country, says Harris, comparing it to when her parents met at Berkeley as part of the civil rights movement in California in the 1960s.       5.20pm GMT    Video: Ashley Judd's 'nasty women' speech                   5.19pm GMT       Cecile Richards, head of Planned Parenthood, takes to the stage.  My pledge today is our doors stay open, she declares, to huge screams of support from the crowd.       5.17pm GMT    Chicago women's march too big to march     s March on January 21, 2017 in Chicago, Illinois.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Protesters cheer at the women March on January 21, 2017 in Chicago, Illinois. Photograph: John Gress/Getty Images    Over in Chicago, so many thousands of people have turned out to the local women march that the march aspect has been cancelled by police, according to local news reports. However, a rally will still go ahead. Crowd organizers estimate 150,000 reporters, according to a Chicago Tribune reporter who tweeted the news:    BREAKING Crowd at #womenmarchCHI so large that march canceled for safety. People will stay and make voices heard at rally, organizers said.&mdash; Duaa Eldeib (@deldeib) January 21, 2017      Updated at 5.28pm GMT     5.15pm GMT          Janet Mock Photograph: TV screengrab    High profile trans writer and activist Janet Mock takes to the stage. I stand her today as the daughter of a native Hawaiian women and a black veteran from Texas. I stand her as the first person in my family to go to college. I stand here ...to unapologetic proclaim I am a trans writer women revolutionary activist of color, declares Mock. Today by being here, it is my commitment to getting us free that keeps me marching. Our approach to freedom may not be identical, but it must be intersectional and inclusive. It must extend beyond ourselves. I know with surpassing certainty that my liberation is linked to the trans Latina yearning for refuge, says Mock. Our movement is a difficult stpace between our reality and our vision, she says, noting that people need to return ot heir homes and use their experience to organize and resist.    Updated at 5.46pm GMT     5.03pm GMT       Um...    I am honered to serve you, the great American People, as your 45th President of the United States!&mdash; Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 21, 2017    Maybe the images of thousands of women march in the streets around the world against Trump has got him distracted today, because that is not how you spell honor.       5.01pm GMT          Andrea Prada at the march on Washington Photograph: Lauren Gambino for the Guardian    Marcher Andrea Prada, 26, student in DC but is from Colombia:  When I came to this country I felt received by the university, by everybody here, by the people of Maryland, its a very diverse city. But suddenly when Trump came into the race, he started making racists comments and I noticed that people stopped being ashamed to be racist. I think you should be able to be proud of who you are and not have to be ashamed. I thought we were in a new millennium but with this guy, apparently not.        4.56pm GMT       Guardian readers from around the world are continuing to answer our question: Why are you protesting the Trump administration? Theyre doing it with Hamilton references in Barcelona:           BCN women&#39;s March   Hundreds of people of all ages march through central Barcelona, Spain to oppose Trump&#39;s presidency.        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  ID2326543   21 January 2017, 9:33       And shout-outs to Hillary Clinton in Bristol:            Love Wins   This is why I marched today in Bristol. Love needs to win now. There is a lot of negativity pushed out into the world at the moment. Trump is the poster boy for hate, a narcissistic cheesepuff with a megaphone. But it&#39;s the people behind him, silently manifesting this negativity that I worry about. At times like this we need to show there is positivity. There is solidarity. Wherever we are from, whoever we are. I think love must be what we focus on now. And  support too. Support to show that whatever Trumps administration tries to do, the world is witnessing it all. And we won&#39;t be forced to be quiet. Even if  his puppeteers take the whole of reality off the White House website. It doesn&#39;t matter. It&#39;s just noise. We&#39;ll be here, watching, speaking out. Marching. Across the world. Against whatever injustice they are trying to push thru.        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  valm75   21 January 2017, 9:28       Meanwhile, a snapshot from marchers en route to Washington, DC captures a classic sign:            We&#39;re Here - 5   I&#39;ve talked to a handful of demonstrators. The young ones say &quot;It&#39;s like the &#39;60s&quot; and are almost gleeful. Older people seem more solemn. Like we&#39;ve seen this before, the hate emanating from Trump, et al. And worse, those of us who are older feel up against the clock. We MUST make our country better for our children and grandchildren....we are up against the clock. Tomorrow is promised to no one.        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  A. Joseph Layon   21 January 2017, 9:22       Are you attending the women March on Washington, or a satellite event elsewhere Share your photos and experiences at the event with us, via GuardianWitness.       4.51pm GMT    Ashley Judd: I feel Hitler in these streets       Ashley Judd Photograph: Frederick M. Brown/Getty Images    Actress Ashley Judd giving a pretty amazing beat poetry style speech about being a nasty women. I am not as nasty as a swastika on a rainbow flag, says Judd.  I feel Hitler in these streets. A moustache traded for a toupee, Nazis renamed, the cabinet electro-conversion therapy the new gas chambers... turning rainbows in suicide notes, I am not as nasty as racism, white supremacy, misogyny, ignorance, says Judd.  Im nasty as my grandmothers fought to get me into that voting booth, says Judd. Why is the work of a black women and a Hispanic women worth 63 and 54 cents of a privileged white mans daughters dollar? Judd talks about Viagra and anti-hair-thinning drugs being tax free while menstrual products are taxed. Is the bloodstain on my jeans more embarrassing than the thinning of your hair? she asks. Our pussies aint for grabbing. Theyre for reminding you that our walls are stronger than Americas ever will. They are for pleasure, they are for birthing new generations ... of nasty women, she declares.    Updated at 4.56pm GMT     4.49pm GMT       Outside Washington, up to 2 million people have gathered in cities around the world as part of an international day of action in solidarity with the women March on Washington after Fridays inauguration of Donald Trump as the 45th president of the United States, writes Nadia Khomami:   Related: Protests around world show solidarity with Women's March on Washington    Heres a gallery of some of those marches:   Related: Women's marches around the world  in pictures      Updated at 4.50pm GMT     4.45pm GMT       The tense atmosphere in Washington surrounding Donald Trumps inauguration, which saw the emergence of anarchists, tear gas and smashed windows, has given way on Saturday to a celebration of pink hats, rainbow flags and nasty women. Tens of thousands were expected to mass on the National Mall for the women March on Washington to send a message to the president-elect that their rights would not be compromised.  The crowds, bringing women and men from all across the country, packed into buses and trains en route to the spot where Trump was sworn in on Friday as the next US president. Many of them donned so-called pussy hats, pink knit hats with mini ears that served as a rebuke of the video leaked during the presidential campaign showing Trump boasting of sexually assaulting women. They brandished signs with Hillary Clintons memorable statement as first lady that women rights are equal rights and labeling themselves nasty women, a reference to Trumps jab on the debate stage against the first women presidential nominee. The tone stood in stark contrast to Friday, when widespread protests to Trumps inauguration occasionally erupted into clashes with police. The security presence was notably lighter on Saturday, befitting the days mood. Parents hoisted young children on their shoulders, while others arrived with babies in tow dressed for the occasion. Car horns sounded as drivers passing by the crowds expressed their approval. Strangers cheered at one another from across the street, waving signs related to women issues and more. There were pro-LGBT banners, posters declaring refugees humans, not terrorists, and vows that the people would rise alongside sea levels. Hopefully this day is going to be a launch for an ongoing coming together to stand up for our rights, not just as women but as humans, said Gael Murphy, a co-founder of Code Pink, the left-leaning grassroots organization describing its mission as promoting peace and social justice.  I personally dont think that Trump is a legitimate president, she added, citing Russian interference in the US election and structure of the electoral college. He has done nothing to prepare for the job, Murphy said. But were here and were not going anywhere. We will push back.    Women from Massachusetts and New Hampshire outside Trump Hotel. &quot;It&#39;s a beautiful day to fight the patriarchy,&quot; one said. #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/iGXvQVfjAj&mdash; Sabrina Siddiqui (@SabrinaSiddiqui) January 21, 2017         4.33pm GMT       Just in from Reuters, Washington subway reports 275,000 trips as of 11am today in comparison with 193,000 at the same time on inauguration day yesterday.     Updated at 4.39pm GMT     4.30pm GMT    Michael Moore: 'call Congress every single day'       Documentary filmmaker Michael Moore speaks with protesters at McPherson Square during the 2017 Presidential Inauguration on January 20, 2017. Photograph: Jasper Colt /ddp USA/Barcroft    Filmmaker Michael Moore takes to the stage, says it looks like one million marchers are in DC today. OK, we got through day one! he quips. Were in day two now of the Turmp tragedy. Who wants to be in my next movie? asks Moore. Moore gets a copy of the Washington Post and reads the headline of Trump takes power. Heres the power. Heres the majority of America right here, declares Moore. We are here to vow to end the Trump carnage, he adds. I want you to call Congress every single day. Every single day, says Moore. He gives the number to Congress: 202-225-3121 and gets the crowd to chant the number.       4.21pm GMT       Meanwhile in Denver a large crowd seems to be gathering...    Forty minutes to go and Civic Center crowd is legitimately huge #womenMarchdenver pic.twitter.com/C6RbcD4dBO&mdash; Jim Bates (@jrbates) January 21, 2017      Updated at 4.23pm GMT     4.20pm GMT          Kathleen Prugsawan, 52 Photograph: Lauren Gambino for the Guardian    Marcher Kathleen Prugsawan, 52 from Washington DC:  Im not happy to say the least that Trumps new home is DC. But Im here marching for everyone who couldnt be here today. This is the most peaceful gathering of people unhappy with the current administration. The message that I hope he gets: you better fucking pay attention to us now.        4.16pm GMT    Video: Gloria Steinem 'we are the people'                   4.12pm GMT       Over in Athens protestors have gathered outside the US embassy reports our correspondent Helena Smith: Many of the women who have taken to the streets within view of the Acropolis says todays demonstration is only the start of a much broader pressure campaign that will be brought to bear on the Trump administration.  Todays march is our first demonstration in support of a broad spectrum of human rights. And this is only the start. From here on, well be examining the issues, not just the click-bait. Well be writing and calling our elected officials, making our views known, holding their feet to the fire, said Karen Lee who heads Democrats Abroad which organised the protest rally.  We expect better for our country, and were committed to halting the egregious policies the new administration seems set to ram through. The current representation does not reflect the majority in our country, added Sarajane Kidd also from Democrats Abroad.  For me, it is a question of letting Trump and our lawmakers know that we are watching you!       4.06pm GMT       A speaker from the Black women Roundtable notes that they march for the 94% of black women voted for Hillary Clinton - and for the 53% of white women who voted for Donald Trump.       4.03pm GMT         @ambiej  Women March in Paris pic.twitter.com/MNd3abtfSa&mdash; Morgane Renoir (@MorganeRenoir) January 21, 2017         3.59pm GMT          Pooja Panigrahi, 27 Photograph: Lauren Gambino for the Guardian    Marcher Pooja Panigrahi, 27, from Silver Springs, Maryland:  I am so inspired by everyone here. I want to be friends with everyone. We all came with pet causes, but one goal to advance equality. I really think if we band together we can bring about progress. Its terrifying to think about what happens if we dont.        3.53pm GMT    Gloria Steinem addresses the women's march       Gloria Steinem Photograph: Jonathan Leibson/Getty Images for Equality Now    Feminist hero Gloria Steinem addresses the crowd, commenting on Trumps inauguration speech yesterday. Everything that happened before him was a disaster and everything that he would do would be fantastic, the best ever, miracles and all the superlatives. He said he was for the people... I have met the people and you are not them, said Steinem. Just this march today required 1000 more buses than the entire inauguration, noted Steinem. She said shes been speaking with march organizers at solidarity marches from around the world, saying those in Berlin had a message for the crowd. We in Berlin know that walls dont work, she read.  Steinem noted that we have people power we will use it. This is the upside of the downside. This is an outpouring of energy and true democracy that I have never seen in my very long life. It is wide in age, it is deep in diversity and remember the constitution does not begin with I the president it begins with we the people. If you force Muslims to register, we will all register as Muslims. This is a day that will change us forever because we are together, she said. When we elect a possible president, we too often go home. Weve elected an impossible president, were never going home. Were staying together, were taking over, said Steinem.    Updated at 4.32pm GMT     3.39pm GMT    Video: America Ferrera's full speech                   3.38pm GMT       Hillary Clinton isnt at the women March on Washington today (who can blame her after having to attend the inauguration ceremony AND a luncheon with Donald Trump yesterday), but shes tweeted her support:    Thanks for standing, speaking &amp; marching for our values @womenmarch. Important as ever. I truly believe we&#39;re always Stronger Together.&mdash; Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) January 21, 2017         3.36pm GMT       Clad in winter coats and standing in front of a paper banner that read Gloria Allred  Women Seeking Justice Against Trump, four women who have accused Donald Trump of inappropriate sexual contact announced that they would march together in Saturdays women March on Washington.  I am here to seek justice, and am pleased with the opportunity to stand shoulder to shoulder with those who march for women rights today, said Summer Zervos, a former contestant on The Apprentice who has accused Trump of groping her and making aggressive, unwanted sexual advances. She added that her presence was meant to inspire others to stand up to bullies. The women present included Zervos, who claims Trumps behavior occurred in 2007, when she met him at his hotel before the two had dinner; Temple Taggart McDowell, who was Miss Utah 1997 in Trumps Miss USA pageant and accuses Trump of unwanted kissing and touching; and Jessica Drake, an adult film star who claims that Trump kissed and grabbed her without permission and propositioned her for $10,000 at a charity golf tournament.  Trump has repeatedly denied their accusations. On Tuesday, Zervos sued Trump for defamation, in response to his denial that their private meeting took place. Taggart said she was marching in support of the other accusers and victims everywhere of sexual assault and harassment. Attorney Allred, 75, huddled near the women as they spoke. She also beamed down from the banner, where she was pictured smiling and standing with her hands clasped behind her back.       3.36pm GMT       From the women march in Manchester, UK:  Shirley Brown, 52, a midwife, has come along today with her 11-year-old daughter Lindy. She says that for her the protest is both about Trumps election, but also about what he represents.    Shirley Brown and her daughter Lindy are here because they are against austerity, nationalism and protectionism pic.twitter.com/Q3iE3QIgYt&mdash; Frances Perraudin (@fperraudin) January 21, 2017    Im against austerity and how it effects normal every day people, she says. And Trump reflects what some peoples views are. People who have got power and wealth want to protect themselves.Trump reflects a certain view that is for austerity, nationalism and protectionism and protecting the few rather than the many.Shirleys daughter Lindy, says coming to protests inspires them and motivates children like her. She says she has become more interested in politics since Trump was elected.       3.34pm GMT       A speaker from Moms Rising, an activist group of mothers, spoke about the issue of mothers earning less than other women and men.  Mothers earn 71 cents in every dollar compared to fathers. She said mothers of color earn 46 cents in the dollar compared to fathers.       3.31pm GMT    Women members of Congress unite     s march, as people gather prior to Donald Trumps inauguration.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Jackie Speier wears a pink protest hats, symbols of the anti-Trump women march, as people gather prior to Donald Trumps inauguration. Photograph: Brian Snyder/Reuters    Steps away from the crowds, women members of Congress sought to galvanize the spirit of the day by holding events in which they advocated for ratifying the Equal Rights Amendment, expanding access to birth control and fighting Republican attempts to limit access to abortion. California representative Jackie Speier, a Democrat, drew roughly 300 attendees to a breakfast at the US Capitol which brought together advocates such as Patricia Arquette, who memorably called for equal pay for women when accepting an Oscar for best supporting actress in 2015. Today we made clear to the Republicans in Congress and to the new President Donald Trump that women will not go back to being treated as chattel and second-class citizens, Speier said. We will not stand by and allow the rights which weve spent a century working for to be rolled back.       3.27pm GMT       Elsewhere in DC, Donald Trump, Mike Pence and their respective families have just turned up to National Prayer Service at the National Cathedral. Theyre attending a one hour prayer service.    Updated at 3.29pm GMT     3.25pm GMT       Marcher Lauren Singerman, 37 from New York City:  I am just disgusted by the new administration and the threat it poses to so many peoples rights. I am scared for what happens next now is when the real work begins. It was scary to be in Washington DC yesterday. Im from New York and Im not used to being around so many Trump supporters so it felt foreign and surreal. But today its really exciting to see so many pink hats and so many people United for actual progress.      Lauren Singerman at the march on Washington Photograph: Lauren Gambino for the Guardian      Updated at 3.29pm GMT     3.23pm GMT          Actress America Ferrera Photograph: Mario Anzuoni/Reuters    Actress America Ferrera takes to the stage, speaking about being the child of immigrants and how our dignity, our rights have been under attack in this election and that the new president was elected on a platform of hate. But the president is not America. His cabinet is not America. Congress is not America. We are America. And we are here to stay, said Ferrera. Mr Trump, we refuse. We reject the demonization of our Muslim brothers and sisters. We demand an end to the systemic murder and incarceration of our black brothers and sisters. We will not give up our right to a safe and legal abortion. We will not ask our LGBT families to go backwards. We will not go from being a nation of immigrants to a nation of ignorance, said Ferrera. We are, every single one of us, under attack. Our safety and freedoms are on the chopping block... If we dont stand together fight together for the next four years, we will lose together, she said. Considering the Trump organizers specifically said the march was not anti-Trump, these comments are very specifically anti the Trump presidency.    Updated at 9.12pm GMT     3.15pm GMT         Spotted: Little Miss Flint happy af #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/r2FduQ1p9C&mdash; Elizabeth Plank (@feministabulous) January 21, 2017         3.12pm GMT       The march is kicking off with a very powerful song by an indigenous singer, who called on everyones ancestors to look after them today. Now Charlie Brotman, who was the long-time announcer of the inauguration parade, begins an address.       3.10pm GMT       An hour before the march began, the Washington Metropolitan Area Transport Authority issued a notice stating that many of the stations encompassing the District of Columbia and neighboring suburbs of Maryland and Virginia were overcrowded.  Parking lots at stations as far as an hour outside Washington were deemed at capacity, with crowds captured pouring outside the platforms and onto the streets as loaded trains passed them by. It stood in stark contrast to Fridays inauguration, when most stations were unusually empty for the swearing in of the next president of the United States. Judy Tong posts this video of huge numbers of buses parked at RFK stadium, a mile and a half east of Capitol Hill:    RFK bus depot pic.twitter.com/Sxq4J30FU5&mdash; Judy Tong (@judystong) January 21, 2017         3.06pm GMT    women March on Washington kicks off     s March in Stockholm, Sweden.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Protesters carrying banners and placards take part in a women March in Stockholm, Sweden. Photograph: Tt News Agency/Reuters    And the women March on Washington has officially begun. A live feed is available to watch on the women March on Washington Facebook page. Thousands of women (and a few men) are there, many wearing the pink hats. The crowd chants fired up and thank you Obama.     Updated at 3.12pm GMT     2.59pm GMT        s March on Washington\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Cindy Yoe, 58, at the women March on Washington Photograph: Lauren Gambino    Marcher Cindy Yoe, 58, from Prince Frederick, Maryland:  I cannot believe I have to be here after all these years. Weve made so much progress and to go back like this is such a shame. I have never protested in my life. This is the first time and I absolutely thought it was necessary. I have children and grandchildren who will be affected by Trump and his policies. Im marching for them Because I cant imagine what itd be like not to be able to afford healthcare for your baby.        2.50pm GMT       Over at the London women march: Sarah Fox,33 and Sarah Murphy, 34 were both marching with the London Irish Abortion Rights Campaign to raise awareness of the fight to abolish the 8th amendment in Ireland and make safe abortions legal.    Sarah Murphy(L) &quot;When women come together under thesedifferent banners you can see the breadth of oppression they are under.&quot; #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/SbJRbTFXPi&mdash; Alexandra Topping (@LexyTopping) January 21, 2017    I think until women all come together like this under all of these different banners you can forget the breadth of oppression women are under, said Murphy. I think many of the people here feel they are part of a new global women movement. They know its not going to be a quick fix and they are in it for the long haul.       2.41pm GMT        s March on Washington\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Packed DC metro on the way to the women March on Washington Photograph: Lauren Gambino    Reporter Lauren Gambino is stuck on the DC metro with other marchers:  Were stalled on the train because the conductor said we have to wait for the trains ahead of to unload. Hes advising that people who are attending the rally get off a stop early because the next two stops (Archives and Lenfant Plaza) are overcrowded.         2.32pm GMT    DC Women's March    Thousands of women across the world have marched in solidarity with the women March on Washington, and in 30 minutes the main event officially begins. Heres how it will go down:  The event kicks off at 10am ET with a rally on the corner of 3rd St and Independence Ave. Speakers will include Cecile Richards from reproductive health organisation Planned Parenthood, activists Angela Davis and Gloria Steinem, actresses Ashley Judd and Scarlett Johansson, filmmaker Michael Moore and the Mothers of the Movement, a group of mothers whose children died because of violence by the police or gun violence. Janelle Mone, The Indigo Girls and Angelique Kidjo are among the musical acts scheduled to perform. At 1.15pm the march will begin down Independence Ave to 14th St SW, then it will head to the Ellipse and the Washington Monument, where the event will finish at 4pm. Marches in other US cities will also take place, with large marches expected in Boston, New York and Los Angeles. Are you at a march? Tell us why youre marching - and send us pics from the event. You can also tweet to @ambiej.  The DC metro is packed as march attendees arrive:    #womenMarch is standing room only. At least on Metro. 45 mins to kick off. pic.twitter.com/7bf8BU6PbH&mdash; Heidi Przybyla (@HeidiPrzybyla) January 21, 2017      Women cheering as they exit the metro at Union Station #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/vQ0bu37zQa&mdash; Samantha-Jo Roth (@SamanthaJoRoth) January 21, 2017      Updated at 2.51pm GMT     2.24pm GMT    UK government is sticking by plan to force women to 'prove' rape for benefits    Meanwhile, the UK government has been criticised for sticking by its controversial plan to force women to prove rape for benefits. The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) published its response to a consultation on child tax credit exemptions on Friday, and women groups have condemned its contents.  Rachel Krys, co-director of the End Violence Against Women (EVAW) coalition, said: We are profoundly disappointed to see the publication of these new rules which make entitlement to child tax credit dependent on proving rape.  The obvious difficulty of requiring women to identify a child as a product of rape, and then having a third party verify this claim, should have been enough to force a complete rethink of the whole policy proposal. Its well known that women are reluctant to disclose rape to anyone, for many reasons including fear and self-protection, guilt, shame and concern for the impact of the knowledge on other family members. Requiring disclosure to officialdom in order to receive support for children is asking women to trust and depend on someone they may prefer not to.  women groups also said they were concerned that the governments response rejected exempting women who still live with their perpetrator on the grounds that it would allow the alleged perpetrator to financially benefit from the abuse.  Krys said: This whole policy betrays a lack of understanding about sexual and domestic abuse. Leading figures in this government have previously worked to try to improve justice outcomes for rape survivors, so it is extremely sad to see the insistence on this women-judging measure by the DWP.    Updated at 2.31pm GMT     2.22pm GMT       My colleague, Elena Cresci, says the atmosphere in London is really jubilant rather than angry. Someone bought some drums down, she says, and lots are wearing the pink pussy hats.     BEST SIGN #womenmarchlondon pic.twitter.com/S9VxP0J2kK&mdash; Elena Cresci (@elenacresci) January 21, 2017    Meanwhile, another colleague Lisa OCarroll, is pleased to see so many homemade signs.     Great to see March without the usual pre printed political posters pic.twitter.com/xawIvb9Mnn&mdash; lisa o&#39;carroll (@lisaocarroll) January 21, 2017      Bitches against Trump pic.twitter.com/PKWByLNLEA&mdash; lisa o&#39;carroll (@lisaocarroll) January 21, 2017      Updated at 2.28pm GMT     2.21pm GMT         Morning commute #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/CbGsnqT8WK&mdash; Lauren Gambino (@LGamGam) January 21, 2017    In Washington DC, where the USs main march is taking place today, Lauren Gambino reports from the Georgia Avenue-Petworth train station:  There are women. Everywhere.  In a completely anecdotal and unscientific observation, the Georgia Avenue-Petworth station is much busier than it was yesterday. On the train there are women and signage  a lot in the vein of Pussy Fights Back  and a group of women wearing knit pink hats with kitten ears.  There are a few men as well, and one grumpy women who is clearly annoyed by the disruption to her morning commute.      Updated at 2.29pm GMT     2.12pm GMT       In the wake of Donald Trumps win  a tremendous political and cultural loss for women  Ill keep you up to date on the worst news, the best news, and everything in between to help you cope with the next four years. Sign up for a weekly email to hear my thoughts about the week in patriarchy. Check out the inaugural newsletter here.        2.09pm GMT       The UK isnt the only European country to show solidarity with women in the US. There have been protests across the continent, as our readers have been showing us.            Budapest - women&#39;s march!   Women, men, children, of all ages and nationalities ready to cross the Chaom Bridge to protest against sexism, racism and discrimination!        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  Ely Rep   21 January 2017, 12:59                Amsterdam Women&#39;s March   Amazing scenes on Musuemplein in Amsterdam.  The organizers were originally expecting a few hundred people but today thousands turned up to celebrate diversity and condemn Trump-esque behaviour.  Yesterday felt like a dark day to be alive; today felt like love really can trump hate. #whywemarch #womenmarchamsterdam        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  Rousey74   21 January 2017, 14:01                Protesting Trump in the Uffizi, Florence, Italy   Protesters join in march through the streets of Florence, passing through the historic Galleria degli Uffizi museum with messages against hate, against misogyny, and against Trump&#39;s recent attacks on the arts in the United States.        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  Edward Wouk   21 January 2017, 13:21                Down with pussygrabbers!   Women of Erasmus University Rotterdam at the march in The Hague standing up for women&#39;s rights at home and at work.        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  Norah Karrouche   21 January 2017, 13:46         And off goes the MAM family @womenmarch #womenmarchIRE #genderequality pic.twitter.com/DlbwBqdsAJ&mdash; MAM Ireland (@MamIreland) January 21, 2017      Bridges not walls - 100m from where the Berlin Wall once stood #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/AGFNlgQCQO&mdash; NRichardson-Little (@HistoryNed) January 21, 2017         1.58pm GMT       Organisers are expecting around 600 people to attend a rally for women rights today in Manchester, the birthplace of the British women suffrage movement. The event begins in Manchesters Albert Square at 1pm and will last until 3pm.  The rally will include a minutes silence to remember women lost and those at risk without the luxury of free speech. Just around the corner is St Peters Square, where a statue of Emmeline Pankhurst is due to be unveiled on International women Day 2019.   s rally in Manchester\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Jen Langton. Photograph: Frances Perraudin for the Guardian    Jen Langton, 33, a singer and vocal coach, organised todays rally in Manchester. She says she didnt have the means to travel to a protest in another city, so she decided to organise one herself. Sometimes when people are saying that somebody should do something, that person is you, she says. I thought that if I didnt do something, nobody might. A lot of people have been asking why we are doing this, because were not the USA. First of all, there are a lot of American students in Manchester who dont have anywhere to go. But its also about showing solidarity. English-speaking countries do tend to take their cues from each other and there has been a lot of talk about the similarities between the new presidency and the state of affairs in British politics. She says the rally is not partisan and Trump is a symptom of the trends they are protesting against, though she admits the billionaires inauguration has acted as a catalyst to get people out on to the streets. To think that a person who openly supports molesting women for fun now has an international platform on which to espouse that kind of hatred is horrific, and if you dont speak up about it when it happens elsewhere it will start to happen to you, in your country. Its not enough to say its not us, its not here, its not happening in my town.   s women march in Manchester with her husband and two young children, 6 and 3.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Louise Westcott with friends and family. Photograph: Frances Perraudin for the Guardian    Louise Westcott, 39, has come to todays women march in Manchester with her husband and two young children, aged six and three. Its important to show solidarity with whats happening in the US. Its a bit of a dark time at the moment. She says the rally is about more than just Trump. It feels like there are a lot of bad things going on in this country as well. She wanted bring her children along today so they could start to understand the point of protest. Its quite difficult to explain to them what its about and Im not sure they fully understand it yet, she says. But its the whole concept of having a voice and people coming together with a shared message.    Updated at 2.10pm GMT     1.52pm GMT       More pussy hats proudly being worn by women (and men) on their way to the Washington DC march.     Wife, daughter, 2 sisters-in-law on the bus for DC to join the #womenMarch -Awesome!! #women&#39;srightsarehumanrights pic.twitter.com/Px3BuqGaE0&mdash; Eric R. Christiansen (@erichristiansen) January 21, 2017      My wife,her sister and my sister - Sisters! w/ their pussy hats ready 4 march in DC to affirm all values that the Orange One would destroy. pic.twitter.com/7JL3MW3TPE&mdash; Alex Gibney (@alexgibneyfilm) January 21, 2017      Pussy hats, DC version pic.twitter.com/4nneMhuq5K&mdash; marissa henry (@marissahenry3) January 20, 2017      Hundreds in line just to get off the metro at Federal Center SW station. #womenMarch #DC pic.twitter.com/EUyjM6LETt&mdash; Erik Verduzco (@Erik_Verduzco) January 21, 2017      Updated at 1.58pm GMT     1.39pm GMT       My colleague Alexandra Topping has been speaking to protesters in London. She says huge numbers have turned out for the march, which is still in full force.     Carson McColl and his boyfriend and their awesome banner: &quot;Trump typifies toxic masculinity. I&#39;m happy to march under the women&#39;s March&quot; pic.twitter.com/0QLuuvNmB5&mdash; Alexandra Topping (@LexyTopping) January 21, 2017      Best chant of the #womensMarch &quot;We don&#39;t want your tiny hands anywhere near our underpants&quot;. pic.twitter.com/0cmBNkpSsa&mdash; Alexandra Topping (@LexyTopping) January 21, 2017      Huge numbers here in Grosvenor Square. More than 30k have said they are attending the march which is now underway! pic.twitter.com/qY3CSHTGzk&mdash; Alexandra Topping (@LexyTopping) January 21, 2017      Updated at 1.42pm GMT     1.35pm GMT       This tweet helps explain why so many sister marches have popped up across the globe in response to the main one in Washington DC.  Tweet and tell me why you are marching @Nicola_Slawson or drop me an email: nicola.slawson@theguardian.com.     #womenMarch  #Adelaide &quot;what happens in the USA is a warning to us all.&#39; pic.twitter.com/xXjySmouxm&mdash; Collette Snowden (@collettesnowden) January 21, 2017         1.29pm GMT       Back in London, there are quite a few celebrities among the throngs of people carrying placards, including rugby ace Chris Robshaw and Iron Man 3 actor Rebecca Hall.     Can&#39;t make it to Washington, but just found out there&#39;s a sister march in london. I&#39;ll be there. Rebecca Hall (@realrrbecca) January 13, 2017    Hall said she joined the march because she is half-American and half-English and if she had been on the other side of her pond she would have joined the Washington DC demonstration.  It is important for me to march in solidarity, she said. Yesterday was a confusing day and a sad day, I was sad to see Obama leave  We do not know what the government is going to be like.  She said Trumps views, what he said and his politics were aimed at people she cared about  including women, people of colour, immigrants and the LGBT community. She added: If that is all true then it is important that we all stand up and be here, together, in solidarity.     Updated at 1.44pm GMT     1.25pm GMT       In Washington DC, thousands of protesters  many in pink pussy hats  are gearing up to start their march.     The crowd on the Red Line in DC at 7:40 am. All cars similar. #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/QKkMw0hxyq&mdash; Justin Hyde (@Justin_Hyde) January 21, 2017      This will be massive. 8am and already thousands - #womenMarch #DC pic.twitter.com/wUjzAW7Ead&mdash; Cal Perry (@calmsnbc) January 21, 2017      #womenMarch We&#39;re not even in DC yet, and this metro station has a better crowd than the inauguration. pic.twitter.com/iXeJFqwtIJ&mdash; Emily Hecht (@emiblake) January 21, 2017    Read the story behind the hats here:    Related: Casting off Trump: the women who can't stop knitting 'pussy hats'      Updated at 1.42pm GMT     1.13pm GMT       Hello. This is Nicola taking over from Nadia. Wherever you are in the world, please tweet me @Nicola_Slawson and tell me why you are marching or send me a photo of your placard. I would love to hear from you.        1.03pm GMT       Here are some more quotes from marchers about why theyre out in force today. Nazila Kivi, feminist magazine editor, Copenhagen:  Im marching in solidarity with people gendered as women all around the world, especially indigenous, queer and migrant women, who are under a double burden of oppression. Women and our bodies very often become battle grounds for conservative and backwards ideas of nations, borders and racist ideologies. Solidarity and activism is all we have.  Ritah Mutheu Muia, 37, entrepreneur, Nairobi:  We march as the Her Voice society in Kenya because we stand in solidarity with our sisters from the US. We want to send a message that any act or policies that violate human rights or women rights will not be tolerated. In Kenya the fight against gender-based violence is far from over. As Kenyan women we have decided to break the silence.  Im handing the live blog over to my colleague Nicola Slawson now. She will continue to track all the latest developments.     Updated at 1.23pm GMT     12.58pm GMT       People have been sharing their images from marches around the world via GuardianWitness. En route to Washington DC:           Elmira to DC   Bus #4 leaving Elmira to DC        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  Donna Swarthout   21 January 2017, 7:25       In Melbourne:           Melbourne protest against Donald Trump       Sent via GuardianWitness    By  isobellem   21 January 2017, 4:22       And in Mexico:           Entering the Zocalo in Mexico City       Sent via GuardianWitness    By  UptownRuler   21 January 2017, 2:15       Tell us why youre protesting by clicking on the blue Contribute button at the top of this live blog.       12.53pm GMT       The marches taking place in the UK and across the US and wider world are in solidarity with the hundreds of thousands of people expected to descend on Washington DC later today. Although organisers have said the march isnt specifically anti-Donald Trump, it was timed to take place the day after he was inaugurated as president. Trumps attitudes toward women dominated the campaign, particularly after a video revealed him saying he could do anything to women, including grab them by the pussy. At least 24 women came forward with allegations of inappropriate sexual behavior by Trump spanning more than 30 years. Trump has denied the allegations. A recent ABC News/Washington Post poll found the businessman and reality TV star had the lowest favourability rating of any incoming president since the 1970s. Women in the US gave a host of reasons for marching, ranging from inspiring other women to run for office to protesting Trumps plans to repeal the 2010 Affordable Care Act, which among other things requires health insurers to cover birth control. Speakers in Washington will include Cecile Richards from reproductive health organisation Planned Parenthood, activists Angela Davis and Gloria Steinem, actresses Ashley Judd and Scarlett Johansson, filmmaker Michael Moore and the Mothers of the Movement, a group of mothers whose children died because of violence by the police or gun violence. Janelle Mone, The Indigo Girls and Angelique Kidjo are among the musical acts scheduled to perform. Protests have been taking place across the US over the past day.  In San Francisco, thousands formed a human chain on the Golden Gate Bridge and chanted Love Trumps hate. In the citys financial district, a few hundred protesters blocked traffic outside an office building partly owned by Trump. In Atlanta, protests converged at City Hall and a few hundred people chanted and waved signs protesting Trump, denouncing racism and police brutality and expressing support for immigrants, Muslims and the Black Lives Matter movement. In Nashville, half a dozen protesters chained themselves to the doors of the Tennessee Capitol. Hundreds also sat in a 10-minute silent protest at a park while Trump took the oath of office. Organizers led a prayer, sang patriotic songs and read the Declaration of Independence aloud. In the Pacific Northwest, demonstrators in Portland, Oregon, burned US flags and students at Portland State University walked out of classes. About 200 protesters gathered on the Capitol steps in Olympia, Washington, carrying signs that included the messages Resist Trump and Not My Problem.       12.42pm GMT    Yvette Cooper to give speech urging people to 'not let the clocks be turned back'    Yvette Cooper, the Labour MP and chair of the home affairs select committee, will be speaking in Trafalgar Square, London, at around 2pm. Below is a copy of her speech:  Today across the globe women and men are marching against hatred. Marching against division. Marching for equality. Marching because we will not be silenced and we will not go away. We are marching because the most powerful man in the country thinks its ok to grab women by the pussy. We are marching because a talented women MP was murdered by a far right extremist and we need to call it out as the terrorism it is. We are marching because we believe what Jo Cox said that we have more in common than what divides us and because we wont stay on the sidelines any more. And we are not just marching, were singing, we are shouting, were tweeting, snapchatting, facebooking - standing up to the misogynists, the bullies and the haters who try to intimidate and silence people online just as for years they tried to intimidate or silence women on the street, in the pub, in the workplace. Thirty years ago, many of us marched to reclaim the night. Women in Leeds were being told not to go out after dark, because it wasnt safe, there were too many attacks. Instead they came together - in Leeds, London and across the country to reclaim the night, to take back the streets. Our new streets are online. Social media are our new pubs and clubs. So just as we stood together to reclaim the night we will stand together to reclaim the Internet too. But heres the tough thing. We are here because we want to take a stand against Donald Trump. Millions of American women and men voted for him. Marching isnt enough - we need to persuade, to win arguments, to challenge the deep causes of division and to build a future in common. We stand on the shoulders of our mothers and grandmothers - women who have gone before us and won great victories to get us equal pay, abortion rights, rape laws, child care paternity as well as maternity leave. But we wont be judged on our victories but on how we deal with the setbacks. How we come together and rebuild when it feels like the clock is being turned back. For the sake of our children and grandchildren - our daughters and our sons - we are here because we will not let the clock be turned back now.     Updated at 1.01pm GMT     12.31pm GMT       In Bristol, more than 1,000 people marched from Queen Square to College Green  just 72 hours after the event was organised.     At the Bristol March in protest against Trump and his campaign of hate. Amazing atmosphere #lovetrumpshate #womenmarch @nadiakhomami pic.twitter.com/wZ3ySq3VqE&mdash; Jo Priest (@generallyuseful) January 21, 2017      Updated at 1.00pm GMT     12.30pm GMT    London mayor Sadiq Khan joins march to 'support fight for gender equality'    The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, is scheduled to join the march. Khan said he was proud to march alongside women and men from London and around the world to show how much we value the rights every women should have. He added:  As a feminist in City Hall I fully support the fight for gender equality. Its wrong that in 2017 someones life chances and fundamental rights are still dependent on their gender. In recent decades weve made good progress, but there is still so much more for us to do and we must redouble our efforts to make sure that as we strive for equality we do not lose all that we have achieved. As I march today I am more determined than ever to do everything I can to ensure that all girls growing up in London have the same opportunities in life as men.     Updated at 12.57pm GMT     12.27pm GMT       This is the full quote from Trump that has alarmed people the most about his attitude towards women. Its been circulated widely on social media over the past couple of days.    all the best, america pic.twitter.com/wsBtI0jbuQ&mdash; David Farrier (@davidfarrier) January 21, 2017      Updated at 1.00pm GMT     12.23pm GMT       Placards. So may placards! Pizza rolls not gender roles from Italy is a personal favourite.    It&#39;s placard heaven pic.twitter.com/FppFzzwuVO&mdash; Tracy McVeigh (@tracymcveigh) January 21, 2017      Agenda of darkness heard yesterday has consequences, we&#39;ve seen it before @rulajebreal tells #womenMarchRome pic.twitter.com/LP2yrw8AEK&mdash; Laetitia Bader (@LaetitiaBader) January 21, 2017         12.20pm GMT       More marchers explain why theyre pounding the streets today. Aisha Ali-Khan, 36, part-time teacher and carer, Shipley:  I wanted to show solidarity with the rest of the women all over the world. Women are not being heard by those in power anywhere in the world  if they were we wouldnt be marching today. Im a Muslim, of Pakistani heritage  this is not just a white women march, its all women, all over the world. Its a really inclusive movement and its amazing to be a part of that.  Shoomi Chowdhury, Amnesty International, London  We have so much left to do with regards to rights for ethnic minorities, particularly women from ethnic minorities, and not only is the potential for progress going to be lost, weve taken a massive step back. In 20 years, I want to be able to tell my children: I went out and marched the day after Donald Trump became president.     Updated at 12.58pm GMT     12.18pm GMT       Tube stations in central London, including Oxford Circus and Green Park, are packed with people heading to the march. See more photos below.    Green Park tube jammed to capacity with Trump protestors pic.twitter.com/rQvY9OY2Br&mdash; lisa o&#39;carroll (@lisaocarroll) January 21, 2017      The scene at the beginning of the #womenMarch in London pic.twitter.com/0zukUGziII&mdash; Elena Cresci (@elenacresci) January 21, 2017      Our fave placard so far #presidentfart pic.twitter.com/sR4xOUgjsp&mdash; jane martinson (@janemartinson) January 21, 2017      Is that we&#39;re up to? pic.twitter.com/axufhdplgB&mdash; Sarah Butler (@whatbutlersaw) January 21, 2017      #womenMarch  @ELLEUK @lenadecasparis @KatieOldham pic.twitter.com/iC3qAaV9MF&mdash; Emma Gannon (@emmagannon) January 21, 2017         12.12pm GMT       The Guardians Tim Lusher has photos of protesters in London. Theyve come from far and wide, including Liverpool and even Minnesota.    Kim from Liverpool at the London women&#39;s march. pic.twitter.com/ryMNItXM0d&mdash; Tim Lusher (@timlusher) January 21, 2017      Fai West from Minnesota at the London women&#39;s march. pic.twitter.com/pxoXv75fR8&mdash; Tim Lusher (@timlusher) January 21, 2017      Updated at 12.56pm GMT     12.08pm GMT       If youre attending a march wed like to hear from you. You can fill in this form, telling us why taking part is important to you. Wed also like you to share a photograph, or selfie, of you at the protest. You can also email your answers to the questions below along with your photograph to: carmen.fishwick@theguardian.com. You can upload your images and stories through GuardianWitness by clicking the Contribute button at the top of this blog. But please also tell us why youre protesting and why taking part is important to you.    Updated at 12.27pm GMT     12.05pm GMT       Thousands of people are gathered outside the US embassy in London, hundreds of them wearing the pink pussy hats that have becoming a unifying symbol of this march. A huge variety of groups have gathered: those campaigning for migrant rights and women rights, as well as LGBTQ+ groups and anti-war protesters. But there are also many women  and a significant number of men  who have never been on a march before. Lizzy Billington, 62, had come from Cornwall to march with her daughter Alice, 22, and her 18-month-old grandson Isaac. I havent been on a march since the 60s and I didnt think Id ever go on one again but I didnt want to miss this, she said. In the 60s feminism wasnt a dirty word and I feel this new movement is more like that. I find it very exciting. The women Equality party leader, Sophie Walker, said the march was a powerful antidote to the message of fear and division we heard yesterday. She added: It is incredible to see such an huge commitment from all these people to do politics differently. Frances Scott, of the 50:50 campaign which wants a more equal parliament in the UK, urged people to sign a petition run by the group. Im excited but Im angry, she said. Trump was elected democratically, which shows that we really have to change the system. If we really believe in equality, that has to happen.    Already hundreds, if not thousands outside the American Embassy for #womenmarchonlondon pic.twitter.com/ERNQfz1c97&mdash; Alexandra Topping (@LexyTopping) January 21, 2017      Updated at 12.55pm GMT     12.00pm GMT       The women March in London has begun, with more than 25,000 people expected to gather outside the US embassy in Grosvenor Square and march to Trafalgar Square. It takes place less than 24 hours after Donald Trump was sworn in as the 45th president of the United States. Women and men from around the world have said they hope to send a unity message to Trump after a campaign in which he said Mexican immigrants were rapists, discussed banning Muslims from entering the US, and was revealed to have once bragged about grabbing women by the genitals and kissing them without permission. The chants are vast and varied. This one, written by Fiona Apple, may be one of them     &quot;We don&#39;t want your tiny hands/anywhere near our underpants&quot; - Fiona Apple&#39;s new rallying cry ahead of Women&#39;s March Nadia Khomami (@nadiakhomami) January 18, 2017      Updated at 12.53pm GMT     11.37am GMT       More marchers explain why they have taken to the streets today: Rachel Druck, 31, rabbinical student, Tel Aviv:  I am studying to be a rabbi and one of the major values of Judaism is accepting the other, making a place for the stranger and remembering once a year that once we were slaves in Egypt. Those values are propelling me. Im marching because Trump ran a campaign of Islamophobia, antisemitism, misogyny, and racism: to stand up and say he does not speak for me.  Natalino Soares Ornai Guterres, 27, consultant, Dili, East Timor:  I have been displaced from my home and have travelled to other countries (including the US) in search of better opportunities. Being a member of the LGBT community, I am involved because I understand the struggle that our mothers, sisters and people with non-binary gender identities have to go through in a patriarchal society.     Sophie Walker, leader of Women&#39;s Equality Party, with supporters: &quot;This is a powerful antidote to Trump&#39;s message of division&quot; #womenMarch pic.twitter.com/5DwHvhzmOm&mdash; Alexandra Topping (@LexyTopping) January 21, 2017      Updated at 11.42am GMT     11.36am GMT       Many Guardian staff members or their children are out on the march today. They have been posting pictures and updates on Twitter.    My daughter and her mates heading off to the anti-Trump demo #womenmarchlondon pic.twitter.com/3DOgCu95nN&mdash; matthew weaver (@matthew_weaver) January 21, 2017      Train from lewisham station packed with #women and girls including me, my 13 yr old and friends #womenMarch&mdash; jane martinson (@janemartinson) January 21, 2017      Getting ready to march pic.twitter.com/WdyFlKweS2&mdash; Rhiannon L Cosslett (@rhiannonlucyc) January 21, 2017      Updated at 11.38am GMT     11.33am GMT       Protesters in Bristol, England, are out chanting in the sunshine.     Bristol, England January 21, 2017.     Updated at 11.38am GMT     11.28am GMT        s March in London\" width=\"1000\" height=\"662\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Placards are placed against a hedge ahead of the women March in London Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images       People gather in front of the US embassy in Berlin Photograph: Hannibal Hanschke/Reuters      Updated at 11.35am GMT     11.24am GMT       In Washington, the former Desperate Housewives star Felicity Huffman has said she will take part in the march with her two daughters, her sister and her niece.  She told the Press Association: I feel that the election was somewhat of a feminist issue. I feel like the best of us was bested by not the best of them.     Updated at 11.35am GMT     11.22am GMT       My colleague Alexandra Topping is at the London march, speaking to people about why theyve decided to attend today and how they feel.    Lizzy and Alice Billington with Isaac. Lizzy: &quot;I haven&#39;t  been on a march since the 60s, it&#39;s incredibly exciting.&quot; #womenmarchonlondon pic.twitter.com/E5m3bl7S4A&mdash; Alexandra Topping (@LexyTopping) January 21, 2017         11.19am GMT       Women are already arriving in droves for the women March on London. The march will begin at Grosvenor Square at 12 noon with speeches presented by the actor Rebecca Hall. Organisers say they aim to allow different voices to be heard. Speakers in Grosvenor Square will include the British playwright Rebecca Lenkiewicz and the Labour MP Stella Creasy. The march will then begin at 12.30pm and will finish at Trafalgar Square at 2pm with a rally hosted by Sandi Toksvig, involving speeches from celebrities and leaders of supporting organisations. These include women Aid, the Unite union, Black Pride and Amnesty International UK.  The rally will end at 3.30pm.    Updated at 11.37am GMT     11.06am GMT       Hundreds of women, men and children came together in Rome to make their voices heard on several issues, from a feared crackdown on free speech in the US to populism and the marginalisation of ethnic groups.    &quot;This event is important for the entire world to register its outrage at the triumph of populism.&quot; Tara Keenan-Thomson at #womenMarch #Rome pic.twitter.com/qv4wusVc9b&mdash; Angela Giuffrida (@GiuffridaA) January 21, 2017      &quot;Trump&#39;s rhetoric during the election campaign was extremely dangerous when there are lives at stake.&quot; #womenMarch #Rome pic.twitter.com/YkE3GrffNp&mdash; Angela Giuffrida (@GiuffridaA) January 21, 2017      Updated at 11.38am GMT     10.58am GMT       Marchers from around the world have spoken to the Guardian about why they are protesting today. Ill post a few of these throughout the day. Maria Kostaki, 43, author, Athens:  While not a citizen of the US, I am organising this march in Athens because I believe the issues it represents are global. Its about humanity. Its about women rights, racism, equality, LGBT rights. I have a four-year-old son and I do not want him to grow up in a world where everything we have fought for is taken away. We cant allow anyone to reverse what we have built.  Lotje Horvers, 34, tour manager, Amsterdam  I want to be part of the message to the world that there are more people who love than people who hate, and I will not stand by silently while a lying bully is given one of the most responsible positions in the world. I cannot be at peace with the fact he uses his voice to set an example that it is acceptable to be demeaning to women and minorities.     Updated at 11.02am GMT     10.54am GMT       Of course, not everyone supports todays movement, for varying reasons.    I&#39;m planning a &#39;Men&#39;s March&#39; to protest at the creeping global emasculation of my gender by rabid feminists. Who&#39;s with me?&mdash; Piers Morgan (@piersmorgan) January 21, 2017      Do the people organising a women&#39;s march against Donald Trump realise it&#39;s precisely this sort of stuff that lead to Donald Trump.&mdash; (((Dan Hodges))) (@DPJHodges) January 19, 2017      It&#39;s a joke #womenMarch  It shows no graciousness. Load of uptight frustrated neo-libs trying to close the door after the horse has bolted Robin Marchesi (@robinmarchesi) January 21, 2017         10.42am GMT       And here are some of the pictures youre posting on social media.    Women (and men) gather in front of the majestic #Pantheon in #Rome ahead of the #womenMarch #wearenotfakenews pic.twitter.com/VTBJ1lWAAF&mdash; Angela Giuffrida (@GiuffridaA) January 21, 2017      I love this sign @SarahLerner made for the #womenMarch. pic.twitter.com/Wi4PixbX8z&mdash; Rebecca Cohen (@GynoStar) January 21, 2017      Signs? Done! See you in the morning! #womenMarchSac #womenMarch #wmwyouth #whyimarch #youthambassador pic.twitter.com/aLu3LREOZr&mdash; Lisa Gonzales, Ed.D. (@techietwinmom) January 21, 2017      Hard to argue with the sentiment here. #womenMarch #sydney pic.twitter.com/zF09w3uw7g&mdash; Michael Slezak (@MikeySlezak) January 21, 2017      Kentucky &amp; West Virginia @MomsDemand on their way to DC. America is gonna be alright folks. The women have got this. #womenMarch #WhyIMarch pic.twitter.com/SOekI0Wakz&mdash; Aurora Vasquez (@SoyYoya) January 20, 2017      Women&#39;s March LA is already taking over Pershing Square. Here are some of the brilliant designs. #womenmarchlosangeles #womenmarch pic.twitter.com/Rm8M141cFV&mdash; Evelyn Bertrand (@EvelynRBertrand) January 20, 2017         10.36am GMT       Pictures are flooding in of preparations and marches. Here are a few from Thailand and Australia.     A women holding her child and a protest sign in Bangkok, Thailand. Photograph: Diego Azubel/EPA       Sky-writing in Sydney Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP       Protesters in Sydney Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP     s sign in Sydney\" width=\"1000\" height=\"708\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A protesters sign in Sydney Photograph: Andrew Murray/AFP/Getty Images      Updated at 10.48am GMT     10.18am GMT       Hundreds of people joined protests in Tokyo, including many American expatriates. Trump presidency gets my blood boiling  Everything we value could be gone. Its time to speak your mind and concerns and to do our best to salvage the values we cherish in America, said Bill Scholer, an art teacher.  In Manila on Friday, about 200 demonstrators from a Philippine nationalist group rallied for about an hour against Trump outside the US embassy. Some held up signs demanding US troops leave the Philippines, and others set fire to a paper US flag bearing a picture of Trumps face.    Updated at 10.49am GMT     10.15am GMT       Protesters in Australia and New Zealand were the first to start marching today. In Sydney, Australias biggest city, about 3,000 people gathered for a rally in Hyde Park before marching on the US consulate downtown. A further 5,000 people rallied in Melbourne. In New Zealand there were marches in four cities, involving around 2,000 people. Feminism is my Trump card and Fight like a girl, were among the placards seen in Sydney. Organiser Mindy Freiband told Reuters:  Were not marching as an anti-Trump movement per se, were marching to protest the hate speech, the hateful rhetoric, the misogyny, the bigotry, the xenophobia and we want to present a united voice with women around the globe.  Many of the protesters in Sydney and Melbourne wore pink hats, which activists referred to as their pussyhats. Many said they were worried that Trumps politics and his attitude towards women and minorities could spread. As a mature 56-year-old lesbian, I feel for the first time what is global is local, said Vicki Skehan. Weve come so far with inclusiveness and I dont want to see that go away.     Updated at 10.50am GMT     10.00am GMT       Yesterday in Washington more than 200 protesters were arrested as police used pepper spray and stun grenades to suppress a series of small, violent confrontations before and after Trump was sworn in as president. Thousands of protesters from numerous groups descended on DC for mostly peaceful demonstrations throughout the day, but shortly after Trump was sworn in, violent protests broke out in the downtown area close to the north lawn of the White House and blocks from the path of the inaugural parade.  A few dozen protesters clad in black threw projectiles at police and barricaded the road with newspaper kiosks and bins, which they later set fire to. The group were quickly surrounded by police in riot gear who used sting-ball grenades and pepper spray, police said, after a black limousine was set on fire.    Someone has lit a limo on fire and tagged we the people pic.twitter.com/CyvsGzEfie&mdash; Lauren Gambino (@LGamGam) January 20, 2017    Before the swearing-in ceremony, activists from the anarchist group known as the black bloc smashed storefront windows and cars as they clashed with police.               Protesters at the inauguration. Their shirts spell  RESIST pic.twitter.com/IrgJkmG8Rx&mdash; Lauren Gambino (@LGamGam) January 20, 2017      Updated at 10.52am GMT     9.53am GMT       The women March on Washington is expected to be the largest inauguration-related demonstration in US history. A previous demonstration was the women Suffrage Parade of 1913, in which, one day before President Woodrow Wilsons inauguration, an estimated 5,000 to 8,000 suffragists marched on Pennsylvania Avenue. The parade is considered to be a major milestone for the movement to win women the right to vote, not least because it drew attention to the movement as the thousands of people who were in Washington for the inauguration witnessed the procession. The 1913 march is set to be depicted on the back of the redesigned $10 bill in 2020. Another inauguration that drew strong reaction from the world was that of Richard Nixon in 1968, as the United States fought an unpopular war in Vietnam.    Updated at 10.53am GMT     9.21am GMT       Organisers women March Global, the international arm of the Washington march, have said Donald Trumps election has ignited a powder keg under the global women rights movement that will have far-reaching ramifications. As many as 500,000 people are expected to descend on DC, joined by as many as 1.5 million more marching in support in 161 cities across all seven continents.  The organisers are determined to capitalise on the wave of activism that has attracted hundreds of thousands of first-time campaigners as well as seasoned activists. The women of the world were sitting on a powder keg and Donald Trump just lit the match, Evvie Harmon, a women March co-founder and global coordinator, told the Guardian. Set up after Trumps election victory, the global movement is being hailed as an unprecedented grassroots movement, and organisers say it will have an immediate and concrete impact.  Many international coordinators say they are marching in solidarity with US women, but that human rights and not Donald Trump are the focus. Cells set up throughout the US and hundreds of other places are plotting local campaigns, from preventing the construction of oil pipelines to outlawing female genital mutilation.  They will adhere to the guiding vision of the women March on issues such as the rights of immigrant, disabled and LGBTQIA women and female workers. Individual groups will decide which targeted actions to take. Marches are due to take place in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and Erbil, Iraq where an organiser from Alliance for Peace and Human Rights (APHRO) said holding the march was a challenge because of tribalism, corruption and the difficulty of getting approval from the government who deny that women have challenges in this Iraqi society, such as lack of salaries, terror, hate, exploitation and trafficking. Harmon added:  I dont know any grassroots organisation that has grown to this size in only two months. There are now about 1,000 coordinators around the world. Its too big and its growing too fast to control. And we wouldnt want to. We just want to support and help it to flourish.     Updated at 10.55am GMT     9.00am GMT       In the UK at least 14 marches, demonstrations and gatherings are planned. In London, tens of thousands of people are planning to turn out in solidarity, and sister demonstrations are also being held in Bangor, Barnstaple, Belfast, Bristol, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Lancaster, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Shipley, Southampton, St Austell and York. The London march starts at midday at the US embassy: 24 Grosvenor Square, W1A 2LQ. Marchers plan to assemble in front of the embassy before making their way to Trafalgar Square for a 90-minute rally from 2pm. People who would rather take a shorter route can join the march where Pall Mall meets Waterloo Place.  Everything you need to know about the UK marches can be found in our report below.   Related: Women's marches across the UK: what you need to know      Updated at 10.56am GMT     8.53am GMT       The women March on Washington starts at 10am EST, near the south-east corner of the National Mall. But before and after then, many women marches are taking place across the US and around the world.  There are marches planned in every state in the US, as well as many countries in Europe, Central and South America, Africa, Asia and various cities across Canada and Australia. Those marching outside the US are doing so in solidarity with American women and standing up for the rights of women in their own countries. A map on the women March website allows you to search for the sister march closest to you.   s March locations\" width=\"500\" height=\"247\" class=\"gu-image\" />  women March locations Photograph: Women's March    Here is a list of all the countries in which marches are taking place. Some of them will see numerous marches across different cities. Antarctic PeninsulaArgentinaArubaAustraliaAustriaThe BahamasBelarusBelgiumBermudaBoliviaBotswanaBrazilBulgariaCanadaCaribbean NetherlandsCayman IslandsChileColombiaCongoCosta RicaCzech RepublicDenmarkEcuadorFinlandFranceGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGreeceGuatemalaHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIraqIrelandIsraelItalyJapanKenyaKosovoLatviaLebanonLiberiaLithuaniaMacauMadagascarMalawiMauritiusMexicoMyanmarNetherlandsNew ZealandNicaraguaNigeriaNorwayPeruPolandPortugalRomaniaRussiaRwandaSaint Kitts and NevisSaudi ArabiaSerbiaSingaporeSlovakiaSloveniaSouth AfricaSouth KoreaSpainSwedenSwitzerlandTanzaniaThailandUnited KingdomUruguayVietnamZambiaZimbabwe    Updated at 10.57am GMT     8.27am GMT       Hundreds of thousands of women are expected to take to the streets of Washington DC on Saturday for the women March on Washington, in what may be one of the largest marches in recent US history. Although the organisers say the march isnt specifically anti-Donald Trump, it was timed to take place the day after the businessman and former reality TV star was inaugurated as the 45th president of the United States, to the dismay of many who had been appalled by his record on the election trail.  Trumps attitudes toward women dominated the campaign, particularly after a video revealed him saying he could do anything to women, including grab them by the pussy. At least 24 women came forward with allegations of inappropriate sexual behavior by Trump spanning more than 30 years. Trump has denied the allegations. Today women  and men  are taking to the streets to send a bold message to our new government on their first day in office, and to the world that women rights are human rights, according to the marchs official mission.  The event kicks off at 10am ET with a rally on the corner of 3rd St and Independence Ave. Speakers will include Cecile Richards from reproductive health organisation Planned Parenthood, activists Angela Davis and Gloria Steinem, actresses Ashley Judd and Scarlett Johansson, filmmaker Michael Moore and the Mothers of the Movement, a group of mothers whose children died because of violence by the police or gun violence. Janelle Mone, The Indigo Girls and Angelique Kidjo are among the musical acts scheduled to perform. At 1.15pm the march will begin down Independence Ave to 14th St SW, then it will head to the Ellipse and the Washington Monument, where the event will finish at 4pm.  Other celebrity guests include singers Cher, Katy Perry and Zendaya, model Chrissy Teigen, comedians Amy Schumer and Cristela Alonzo, TV host Padma Lakshmi, artist Kara Walker, and actresses Hari Nef, Amandla Stenberg, Frances McDormand, Uzo Aduba, America Ferrera and Julianne Moore. Women from all over the country are pouring into DC, with trains, planes and buses full of marchers arriving on Friday and early Saturday morning.    THIS IS WHAT a plane full of women who are ready to resist the Trump agenda LOOKS LIKE pic.twitter.com/jqLPNE9VOh&mdash; ann friedman (@annfriedman) January 20, 2017    For those attending, Nicole Puglise put together a guide to what you can and cant bring to the march (yes to posters, no to colored backpacks). More than 280 independently organized marches will also be held in solidarity in all 50 states. A regularly updated map on the march website allows people to search by zipcode for their nearest event. More than 20 countries will also host solidarity marches, with nations including Australia, Canada, Portugal and Mexico and the UK holding events. Guardian reporters including Molly Redden, Lauren Gambino, Sabrina Siddiqui and Laurence Mathieu-Lger will at the DC march to provide live updates.  Well provide interviews, news and photos from the march all day. Stay tuned.    Updated at 11.01am GMT  "
"39""Campaigners have welcomed a decision by a private girls school to allow students to use boys names and wear boys clothes should they wish under a new gender identity protocol. St Pauls girls school in west London, whose former pupils include the MP Harriet Harman and the actor Rachel Weisz, will now consider requests from students from the age of 16 to go through a formal process to be known within the school either as boys or as gender-neutral. The move is a response to pupils questioning gender identity and an attempt to ensure the safety and wellbeing of pupils who dont want to identify as one gender or another, the high mistress Clarissa Farr told the Sunday Times.  There are thought to be around 10 pupils in the current sixth form who wish to be known as gender-neutral or as boys.  We are moving to the point where your gender is a choice, said Farr. I see this as a social phenomenon, especially in London, which is much talked-about among school leaders. She added: We have had an LGBT society for a long time. The school is very relaxed about sexual orientation but this is a different issue. This is about gender reassignment. That is a new thing for us. We consulted the pupils to find out what the issues were. Their main preoccupation has been to look after people who dont want to identify as one gender or another. Sue Sanders, chair of Schools Out UK, called it a sensible and smart move. While enabling students to decide which gender they wanted to be should automatically be protected under the Equality Act, it was a positive move to be welcomed  particularly as it came in LGBT History month, she added.  The gender fluidity of young people has become more pronounced in the last three to four years; there is a growing confidence in young people to challenge binary constraints, she said. This is really about organisations keeping up with how people are perceiving themselves  this is part of the whole process of exploding those gender boxes. The new St Pauls protocol says the school takes a neutral stance, neither encouraging nor discouraging students, and while it is only open to those in the sixth form, pupils aged 11-15 can have discussions at any time to explore their gender identity and receive support to prepare for a possible application at the right time.  Students who wish to change the gender they are identified with must write a written request setting out their reasoning, before having counselling and pastoral support to help them debate and reflect. Parents would in most circumstances know about the request and preferably would be fully involved in such discussions. Gender-neutral uniform policies are already in place in about 80 mixed-sex schools, but gender identity poses a more pressing conundrum at single-sex schools such as St Pauls. Headteachers belonging to the Girls Schools Association have been advised to use gender-neutral words such as pupils, people or students in place of girls. "
"40""A childrens retailer has been accused of being in the stone age for marketing princess costumes for girls, and doctors outfits for boys.  The Early Learning Centre (ELC) has come under fire for a marketing mailout which showed two girls dressed up as Belle and Cinderella who are all ready to go to the ball, whereas a little boy is dressed as Spider-Man. Another girl is dressed in a pink ballerina tutu, while Danny the doctor is here to save the day.  Campaigners Let Toys Be Toys called the marketing campaign really disappointing and a step backwards. They tweeted: Girls are passive princesses while wise, smart, active boys save the day? Very disappointing.    Girls are passive princesses while wise, smart, active boys save the day? Very disappointing @ELCUK HT @lauracbenson pic.twitter.com/vE8cPzfHGB&mdash; Let Toys Be Toys (@LetToysBeToys) February 12, 2017     Related: Girls believe brilliance is a male trait, research into gender stereotypes shows    This email promotes gender stereotypes that girls need to be rescued by boys, said Megan Perryman, of Let Toys Be Toys. It is very binary and we believe there are many ways for girls to play  this email does not reflect how children actually play. Perryman said the ELC has refused to meet with the campaign group, unlike rivals Toys R Us and The Entertainer  and has ignored all correspondence sent by Let Toys be Toys since 2013.  The meetings we have had with other retailers have been very pleasant and productive, they have been about sharing ideas on good practice. Perryman added that the ELC did promote less sterotypical images, such as showing boys playing with dolls on its website.  Charity worker and mother Laura Benson tweeted to the company: OH MY GOD I really thought we were starting to get past this shit, while assistant headteacher Tim Ennion said it was truly awful and urged the company to move out of the stone age.     @LetToysBeToys Come on @ELCUK this is truly awful.  Let&#39;s move out of the stone age #progressivemarketing&mdash; Tim Ennion (@TimEnnion) February 12, 2017     Related: Young children must be protected from ingrained gender stereotypes    Another twitter user @susieep21 tweeted: Its 2017 and were still having to tell people women can be doctors and men can do ballet. Meanwhile @Carriecakes80 urged the company to stop pigeonholing play according to gender, writing: Its down to each kid! My girls LOVE being a Princess, with a toy gun! My sons loved dolls, let THEM choose!    @LetToysBeToys @ELCUK its down to each kid! My girls LOVE being a Princess, with a toy gun! My sons loved dolls, let THEM choose!&mdash; Carrie The Cakes (@Carriecakes80) February 13, 2017    A spokesperson for the ELC said: Thank you for bringing this email to our attention. At Early Learning Centre our aim is to offer a wide enough range to appeal to the many different tastes and play interests of little ones. We feature both boys and girls playing with many different toys and dressing-up outfits. The spokesperson pointed to instances of gender-neutral marketing including a photo of a dolls house featuring a boy and another of a tool belt worn by a girl on the companys website."
"41""The venue for the Tokyo 2020 Olympic golf tournament could have the event taken away unless it grants equal playing rights to female members, the International Committee (IOC) has warned. Kasumigaseki Country Club, a private golf course in Saitama prefecture, north-west of Tokyo, forbids women from becoming full members and from playing on Sundays.   Related: Tokyo Olympics: soaring costs set up showdown with IOC    The club is due to host the mens and women tournaments in 2020, four years after golf was reinstated as an Olympic sport in Rio last summer. But in an intervention that could result in more disruption to preparations for the Tokyo Games, the IOCs vice president, John Coates, said organisers would have to find another venue if the Kasumigaseki club retained its discriminatory membership policy. We made quite clear that there has to be gender equality, Coates told Reuters at the Asian Winter Games in Sapporo, northern Japan. If they cant achieve the gender equality then we have to get another course, but the organisers are very confident that they will. Japanese media said the clubs board had met last weekend but had failed to reach a consensus. All 15 members of the board must agree on any changes to the clubs bylaws. An earlier meeting also ended without agreement, with some members reportedly complaining that the club was being browbeaten into changing its rules. We discussed how we should respond after we ask our members how they feel, the boards chairman, Kiichi Kimura, told reporters after the meeting. Its extremely annoying the situation has evolved into what it is so quickly. Right now, were confused. The club is planning to discuss the matter again this Sunday, according to Kyodo news. Critics of the club include the Tokyo governor, Yuriko Koike, who recently called on it to grant equal playing rights to all golfers. I feel very uncomfortable that women cannot become full members in this day and age, she said. It should be a venue open to everyone. Coates, who is head of the IOC body overseeing preparations for the Tokyo Games, said: They either will or they wont (change the rules). Theres plenty of time to move to another golf course if we have to. Founded in 1929, Kasumigaseki has hosted more top-level tournaments than any other course in Japan. After being recommended by an existing member, prospective members must pay 8m (56,600) to become a regular member, and an additional 4m to obtain full membership. Alternatives to Kasumigaseki include the Wakasu Golf Links, a public course near Tokyo Bay that was originally considered as a venue for the golf tournament when Tokyo submitted its bid to host the 2020 Games. Yutaka Morohoshi, vice chair of the nonprofit Japan Golf Council, said staging the golf competition at Kasumigaseki made no sense given its distance from Tokyo, and the fact that members of the public would not be allowed to play there after the Olympics. The Olympics is all about legacy, but we wont have that if the golf tournament is played at a private club, Morohoshi told the Guardian last month. Kasumigaseki isnt the only prestigious golf course struggling with gender equality. Muirfield, which has retained a male-only membership policy since it was founded in 1744, is holding a second ballot on whether to admit female members. The club said the result of the postal ballot would be announced in the middle of next month. Muirfield attracted widespread criticism after a first ballot last year failed to secure the two-thirds majority required to change the policy."
"42""Germanys telecommunications watchdog has ordered parents to destroy or disable a smart doll because the toy can be used to illegally spy on children. The My Friend Cayla doll, which is manufactured by the US company Genesis Toys and distributed in Europe by Guildford-based Vivid Toy Group, allows children to access the internet via speech recognition software, and to control the toy via an app. But Germanys Federal Network Agency announced this week that it classified Cayla as an illegal espionage apparatus. As a result, retailers and owners could face fines if they continue to stock it or fail to permanently disable the dolls wireless connection. Under German law it is illegal to manufacture, sell or possess surveillance devices disguised as another object. According to some media reports, breaching that law can result in a jail term of up to two years. The ruling comes after Stefan Hessel, a student at Saarbrcken University, raised concerns about the device, which was voted one of the top 10 toys of the year in 2014 by the German toy trade association. Access to the doll is completely unsecured, Hessel told Saarbrcker Zeitung. There is no password to protect the connection. The student said hackers could access the doll via its bluetooth connection from a distance of up to 15 meters, listening in on conversations as well as speaking directly to the child playing with it. The German ruling could potentially have EU-wide consequences for toymakers. The EUs commissioner for justice, consumers and gender equality, Vera Jourov, said: Im worried about the impact of connected dolls on childrens privacy and safety. While the monitoring and the enforcement of the data protection rules are the responsibility of the national data protection authorities, the national consumer authorities work together under the Consumer Protection Cooperation network. The commission is organising a workshop bringing together the consumer authorities and the data protection authorities in March to further discuss the problem with smart toys and appliances. Vivid Toy Group has not responded to a request for a comment on the German ruling. Previously the company has said examples of hacking were isolated and carried out by specialists, but it was looking into upgrading the app used along with the doll."
"43""It was an eagerly anticipated match, pitting a self-described feminist who has welcomed more than 40,000 Syrian refugees to his country against a president who once bragged about grabbing women and has sought to crack down on immigration.   Related: Justin Trudeau says it's not Canada's duty to 'lecture' Trump on immigration    But anyone expecting Justin Trudeau to stand up to Donald Trump probably came away disappointed on Monday, as the Canadian prime minister met with the new president for the first time. The last thing Canadians expect is for me to come down and lecture another country on how they choose to govern themselves, Trudeau told reporters at a joint press conference, after standing by as Trump gave an unapologetic defence of his controversial travel ban.  Trudeau continued: My role, our responsibility, is to continue to govern in a such a way that reflects Canadians approach and be a positive example in the world. Although some might have longed for Trudeau to stake out the moral high ground  on Trumps travel ban, his casual misogyny or his bullying rhetoric against allies such as Mexico  Mondays meeting was always going to focus on cold economic realities.  Since the inauguration, Canadian officials have taken every opportunity possible to point to the economic growth  and millions of jobs  which depend on cross-border trade.   Related: 'So far from God, so close to the US': Mexico's troubled past with its neighbour    And in terms of cold realpolitik, the tactic seemed to have paid off: Trump praised the countries economic ties and implicitly contrasted warm relations with Canada with the festering diplomatic crisis with Mexico.  We have a very outstanding trade relationship with Canada. Well be tweaking it, Trump told reporters. Its a much less severe situation than whats taking place on the southern border. On the southern border, for many, many years the transaction was not fair to the United States. Since Trumps shock election victory, Trudeau has consistently refrained from directly criticising the president. It is not the job of a Canadian prime minister to opine on the American electoral process, he told reporters last month when asked if he thought Trump was a misogynist.  Analysts point to the Canadian economy to explain his reluctance to take aim at Trump; three-quarters of Canadas exports go to the US and roughly 2.5 million Canadian jobs depend on American trade. Trudeau has instead relied on more subtle means to highlight the differences between Washington and Ottawa. Amid the chaos and uncertainty created by Trumps travel ban, Trudeau fired off a tweet highlighting that Canada stood ready to welcome those fleeing persecution, terror &amp; war...regardless of your faith Another tweet simply showed the prime minister greeting a Syrian refugee at the Toronto airport, with the hashtag #BienvenueAuCanada  welcome to Canada.    #BienvenueAuCanada pic.twitter.com/rUhrIXiFcR&mdash; Justin Trudeau (@JustinTrudeau) January 28, 2017    Mondays visit also offered a jarring juxtaposition as Trudeau  whose gender- balanced cabinet made headlines around the world  joined forces with Trump to launch a council dedicated to improving opportunities for women in the workforce. While the idea originated from Trudeaus office, gender equality was portrayed as an area of mutual interest, despite the fact that Trumps has nominated just four women for senior administration positions. One of Trumps first orders banned international NGOs from providing abortion services or offering information about abortions if they receive US funding. I just want to say, Mr Prime Minister, that Im focused and youre focused on the important role women play in our economies, said Trump, who in 2005 told a reporter that he did not change diapers. We must work to address the barriers faced by women and women entrepreneurs, including access to capital, access to markets and very importantly access to networks, he added.  Many observers pointed to other subtle shows of difference during Mondays visit. Much was made of the leaders first handshake, in which Trudeau held his ground as Trump seemingly attempted to pull the prime minister towards him.  Others pointed to Trudeaus use of French throughout the press conference; Trump is not known to speak any foreign languages.  Trudeau also used the press conference to highlight the tens of thousands of Syrian refugees who have been brought to Canada in the past year or so without any compromise to the countrys security. Relationship between neighbours are pretty complex, Trudeau noted at one point. And we wont always agree on everything."
"44""Irans president has come under criticism for surrounding himself with an all-male entourage while hosting a predominantly female delegation visiting Tehran from Sweden.    Related: Hassan Rouhani sworn in as president of Iran, urging moderation and respect    Pictures of the meeting at Tehrans presidential palace show a smiling Hassan Rouhani sitting opposite the Swedish prime minister, Stefan Lfven, who had six women accompanying him.  One Twitter user addressed Rouhani directly online, asking in Persian: How would you feel seeing this photo?  Golnaz Esfandiari, an Iranian journalist, also criticised the photograph on Twitter.    #Iran officials vs Swedish delegation. Congrats #Iran on the #allmalepanel in a country where 60 percent of university graduates are women Golnaz Esfandiari (@GEsfandiari) February 11, 2017    Sussan Tahmasebi, an award-winning Iranian women rights activist, said the abundant presence of women in the Swedish delegation sent a powerful message to Iran. The sensitivity around this issue is important because women should have been present among the Iranian delegation, she said.  Rouhani has a number of women in his cabinet serving as his vice-presidents, including Shahindokht Molaverdi, who has been outspoken about women rights, but no female ministers and none accompanied him at Saturdays panel. Lfven met Molaverdi in a separate meeting in Tehran on Sunday. In 2015 Rouhanis foreign ministry appointed Irans first female ambassador since the 1979 Islamic revolution, marking a breakthrough for women in government.  Leila Alikarami, who monitors women rights in Iran, said Rouhanis all-male delegation was particularly disappointing given his campaign promises to promote the cause. Molaverdi has a long experience in women affairs but she is not given enough powers, Alikarami said, referring to the vice president. She faces a lot of obstacles. women rights is not this systems priority, it only comes up at election time. Alikarami also said the visiting female diplomats should not have been forced to wear hijabs. There should be a freedom of choice for all women, she said. They should not face discrimination because of their gender. Wearing the hijab has been an integral policy of the Islamic republic ever since the 1979 revolution and foreign female visitors from prime ministers to celebrities have adhered to it while on Iranian territory.  Members of the Swedish delegation, particularly trade minister Ann Linde, faced criticism in Sweden for covering their hair. But Tahmasebi said it was important for the women to attend. If [the] Swedish women hadnt gone to Tehran, the meeting would have taken place without them, but with male officials. Its important that Iran would have relations with Sweden, a country that pursues feministic foreign policy, she added. It is not the first time this year that the Swedish government has drawn applause for its gender equality. Earlier this month Swedens deputy prime minister, Isabella Lovin, posted a photograph of herself and her female colleagues after she signed a bill protecting the environment. The image was widely shared online and taken as a wry comment on pictures of Donald Trumps all-male Oval Office team."
"45""Vladimir Putin has signed into law a controversial amendment that decriminalises some forms of domestic violence. The amendment, which sailed through both houses of Russian parliament before Tuesdays presidential signing, has elicited anger from critics who say that it sends the wrong message in a country where, according to some estimates, one women dies every 40 minutes from domestic abuse. It makes moderate violence within families an administrative, rather than criminal, offence. From now on, beatings of spouses or children that result in bruising or bleeding but not broken bones are punishable by 15 days in prison or a fine, if they do not happen more than once a year. Previously, they carried a maximum jail sentence of two years.     Alena Popova stages a lone protest against the legal amendments in Moscow last month. Photograph: Vladimir Gerdo/Tass    Alena Popova, an activist who has campaigned against the law, said it would be fine to pass the amendments if a draft law specifically aimed at tackling domestic violence was passed at the same time. But that law, which provides for restraining orders and other safeguards in domestic abuse cases, is stalled in parliament and is not expected to be passed. Passing these amendments and not passing the other law is another sign that our society refuses to take this problem seriously, she said. Defenders of the law say it closes a nonsensical loophole by which violent acts committed by family members are punished more harshly than those committed by strangers.   Related: Aren't you interested in the hairstyles of male cosmonauts, too? What it is to be a women in Moscow    The question is not whether its OK to hit or not. Of course it isnt. The question is how to punish people and what you should punish them for, said Olga Batalina, one of the MPs who drafted the law.     Olga Batalina said the changes merely removed a loophole where family members were punished more harshly for attacks. Photograph: Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP    Others claim the law is about protecting Russian traditions according to which the family is sacred. Priest Dmitry Smirnov, head of the Russian Orthodox Patriarchys commission on family matters, said on a television programme that the idea the state should be able to poke its nose into family affairs was a western imposition on Russia. Some of the things happening in northern Europe now are such that even Hitler couldnt have dreamed them up, he said. Some of the mainstream discussion around gender and domestic violence in Russia can be shocking. An article last week in the science section of the popular tabloid Komsomolskaya Pravda cheerfully told readers about an advantage of wife-beating. It said: Recent scientific studies show the wives of angry men have a reason to be proud of their bruises. Biologists say that beaten-up women have a valuable advantage: they more often give birth to boys! The article was later amended.   Related: Breaking the taboo: the Moscow women taking a stand against domestic violence    Popova said that during her one-women protest outside parliament, various people had insulted her. Some had claimed she was paid to protest by western governments, while others told her that some women simply deserved to be beaten, she said.  Discussion of the bill in parliament coincided with the women marches in Washington DC and around the world in the aftermath of Donald Trumps inauguration as president, provoking a broader discussion about the problem of domestic violence and the role of women in contemporary Russia.   s inauguration\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A poster for a Moscow store offers discounts to Americans on the day of Donald Trumps inauguration. Photograph: Maxim Shipenkov/EPA    In Moscow, there was no official march organised, partly due to lack of interest, and partly because of the difficulty in gaining permission to march from the Russian authorities. A planned demonstration against the domestic violence amendments has been repeatedly stymied by authorities. Margarita Grigoryan, a Moscow-born businesswomen who grew up in London but moved backed recently to open a business, organised a short walk around the Russian capital. About 15 people took part. I was depressed that someone so overtly misogynistic could get into the White House, and especially being in this country, I felt I wanted to protest, but there was nothing at all organised here, she said. Political analyst Maria Lipman said the situation around gender roles in Russia was paradoxical. The Soviet period saw gender equality from above, so some of the rights that women in the west fought for were granted or even imposed on Russian women, said Lipman. This meant that the way gender relations developed was different, and Russian women never had to fight for their rights. Now on the one hand we have huge problems with unequal pay, with no women in politics, with domestic abuse, but on the other hand there are more top [female] editors of leading media outlets than in the United States, and there are many top women bankers, for example.   Related: Russian MP seeks to decriminalise domestic violence    Nearly 300,000 people signed a petition organised by Popova to protest against the amendments, and a recent online campaign also attempted to bring the domestic abuse problem out into the open. Using the hashtag #Iamnotscaredtospeak, thousands of Russian women shared their stories of sexual harassment, violence and rape on social media. The tidal wave of terrible stories shocked many Russians, and prompted something of a discussion. But there is a major disparity between the attitudes of Russias urban middle class, and the situation in the regions. There is a big constituency in Russia for whom interference in family affairs can be portrayed as another issue in which the west is trying to impose its views on Russia, said Lipman.     Maria Alekhina of Pussy Riot during her trial in 2012. Photograph: Misha Japaridze/AP    Maria Alekhina, of the Pussy Riot protest group, said the legal amendments were a red herring, and it was Russian society and attitudes as a whole that needed to change to help alleviate the domestic abuse situation.         video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            data-video-poster=\"Pussy Riot on prison, Vladimir Putin and vomiting dogs    Alekhina spent nearly two years in prison for carrying out a punk prayer in Moscows main cathedral in 2012, and said between a quarter and a third of the women she met in jail were there for attacking abusive husbands: They were usually women who had been beaten up for years, and there was nowhere for them to go. We have no social help and no psychological help available. So one day they just pick up a knife and kill their husbands.  This article was amended on 9 February 2017 to clarify that the new law decriminalises some forms of domestic violence by making it an administrative, rather than a criminal, offence. The information that Komsomolskaya Pravda amended its article after publication was added."
"46""Men: Time to Listen. So read a sign on the National Mall in Washington during the women March protesting against Donald Trump the day after his inauguration.  Now that the women movement has become the spearhead of resistance to the Trump administration, a pressing question has emerged for half the population: what role, if any, are men to play in the crisis of gender politics that is inevitable over the course of the next four years?  The situation has, in one sense, simplified enormously. The elaborate labyrinths of identity politics have crumbled and left behind basic questions of fundamental human decency. Trumps actions as president, more than his demeaning behavior on the campaign trail, are deliberately keeping women from power and attacking programs that promote their health, both in the US and globally. Feminism as humanism  the very basic idea that women are people  is now under threat. Any man who claims to possess a shared sense of humanity with women must stand with them.  The evidence has become too glaringly obvious. Who could embody more perfectly rape culture than a man who was elected president of the United States while boasting about sexual predation? What more proof do you need that women face structural disadvantages in their work lives than Hillary Clinton winning the popular vote by nearly 3 million votes and still losing?    Saying we need mens liberation is absurd. But men are choosing not to be providers rather than to take on women work     But Trump represents far more than a setback for women. He also represents the failure of men to deal with their own questions of gender.  Trump is new. He is not like the straight white males who came before him in the office of the presidency. He is a parody, a simulacrum of masculinity conjured by self-loathing and self-aggrandizement, a reflection of the tormented, contradictory state of contemporary men, the Red Pill made flesh.  Trump represents not masculinity in triumph, but masculinity in decadence.  Two contradictory processes are at work. One is the rise of women to dominance of the middle class; the other is the intractable continuation of male power at the top. Since 2000, women have increased their workplace participation in most countries in the world. Across the OECD, the pay gap declined significantly between 2000 and 2011. In the United States, the number of households led by women has been increasing since the 60s and currently stands at around 40%.   At the same time, women are kept from the top positions. There are any number of ways to register this fact, from a comparison of the salaries of male and female movie stars, to the number of women who are full professors, to the scandalously few women who are equity partners in law firms.  These two contradictory trends create a world in which the relationship between gender and power is increasingly nonsensical. Masculinity remains emblematic of potency while it becomes, in daily experience, a condition of failure. In an essay for the Atlantic magazine two years ago, I described this turbulent contradiction as the hollow patriarchy. I can think of no purer icon of hollow patriarchy than Donald Trump.  The hollowing out of the patriarchy is set to increase. Trump has the most male cabinet since Reagan, and the decline of men in the middle class is going to continue no matter what that cabinet says or does. Two weeks after the election, Otto, the self-driving truck service recently purchased by Uber, successfully delivered 50,000 cans of Budweiser. Three and a half million truck drivers are currently employed in the US, an overwhelmingly male cohort. A few weeks after that momentous journey, women became, for the first time, the majority of students enrolled in American law schools. They now dominate post-secondary education. Men are not willing to take jobs that are not traditionally masculine. Women continue to enter mens fields.     Trump has the most male cabinet since Reagan, and the decline of men in the middle class will continue no matter what     Trump has emerged as a parody of masculinity and feminism is set back at the moment when the traditional male role of provider is about to vanish. This contradictory process is far from unprecedented. During the Reagan-Bush years, the pay gap closed from 64 cents to 77 cents, a time in gender politics that Susan Faludi famously described as a backlash. Feminism as we have known it since the second world war is insufficient to fight Trump because Trump does not simply represent the traditional patriarchy, against which women can oppose their own collective interests. His misogyny is not of that sort. The Republicans were offered more or less a complete array of traditionally patriarchal figures during the primaries. Jeb was old dad. Rubio was young dad. The Republicans rejected them all for a man who possesses not a single traditional masculine virtue, a man who cannot even tie a tie without taping it together at the back.  We have reached the point where the old struggles, both intellectual and political, simply will not do any more. The incompleteness of the way we talk about gender is original and terminal. It is the inevitable result of thinking through gender by beginning and ending with the position of women.  Saying we need mens liberation is of course absurd  look at Trumps cabinet. But men are literally choosing not to be providers rather than to take on women work. This is disastrous for them, for women and for the wider economy. We cannot shape men until we have some kind of critical understanding of the mechanisms of masculinity. And simply put, we do not have that understanding. The first graduate program devoted to masculinity studies in the US began in 2015. There have been calls for men to join in the feminist movement from its beginning, with two main difficulties: the first is that feminism is inherently about women. And so feminisms message to men has always been pretty simple: behave better to women. Gender studies about masculinity are more or less completely subsumed in the question of mens relationships to women, rather than to themselves or each other. The men at the women march were defined by their relationships to women, too. They were there as fathers, husbands, sons. Thats not enough.  The other problem is that men do not talk explicitly about their own gender. Or rather they do talk about gender, but almost entirely under the cover of talking about sports and clothes. Traditional masculinity has been silent of the subject of itself because it assumed its dominance as an inalienable fact. Patriarchal masculinity believed itself to be an authentic norm; femininity was variable performance.  Trump makes that attitude no longer feasible. He enacts his masculinity as a game of signs. His manliness is flamboyant and histrionic. Every man will be inundated for at least four years with masculinity as a performance. There will be no hiding from the artificiality.     Gender studies about masculinity are subsumed in the question of mens relationships to women, rather than to themselves    In that way, Trump represents an opportunity as well as a catastrophe. The single most shocking fact of the outcome of the 2016 election was just how little gender mattered to voters: 53% of white women voted for Trump and 63% of white men. Trump took 33% of the male Latino vote and 26% of the female Latino vote.  Those facts, in themselves, reveal how far the way we talk about gender has deviated from its reality in American life. During a campaign stop for Hillary Clinton early in 2016, Madeleine Albright declared: Theres a special place in hell for women who dont help each other!  a line that has appeared on Starbucks cups. Forty-two percent of American women felt otherwise, as did 62% of non-college educated women.  The sign I saw at the women March  Men: Time to Listen  was held up, somewhat inevitably, by a man. We need to listen. We need to listen to women. We need to listen to ourselves as well. I couldnt help thinking that there should have been a Mens March against Trump; he represents our failure after all. But who would organize it?  Gloria Steinem famously declared that women liberation will be mens liberation, too. Trump has clarified that the opposite  women bondage, mens bondage  is also true. It is men who need to say this is not us. But then we would have to think about who we are. Stephen Marche is the author of the forthcoming The Unmade Bed: The Messy Truth about Men and Women in the Twentieth Century. "
"47""Chinese feminists have hit out at their countrys answer to Twitter after it gagged one of their movements most visible social media accounts in an apparent bid to stifle criticism of US president Donald Trump. The Feminist Voice in China account on social networking site Sina Weibo was handed a 30-day ban on Monday for allegedly violating Chinese law.    Related: China 'eliminating civil society' by targeting human rights activists  report    The punishment came six days after the group posted a Chinese translation of an article - first published in the Guardian - in which US-based feminist academics called for a new militant feminist struggle, partly in response to Trumps aggressively misogynistic, homophobic, transphobic and racist policies. The article urged activists to launch an international strike on 8 March to protest male violence and support reproductive rights. Xiong Jing, an editor for the Feminist Voice, told the Guardian Weibo had sent the group a private message on Monday night informing it that the account, which was set up in 2010 and has more than 80,000 followers, had been temporarily blocked. Weibo blamed recent publications [that] violated the states relevant laws. Speaking to Radio Free Asia, a US-funded news outlet, Xiong said Weibo had not been very specific about its motivations but we are guessing that its because we sent out some tweets calling for a women strike action against Trump. Li Maizi, one of the leading lights of Chinas nascent feminist movement, said the attempt to silence Feminist Voice was part of a broader government push to rein in those battling for gender equality. It is part of a public opinion war and a battle for influence in China. By blocking the account, authorities were sending a warning to the movement. They are dipping their toes [in the water]. Its like: This time I deleted this one story but next time Ill delete them all. The ban may also reflect Beijings nervousness about the state of US-China relations in the Trump era.  Trumps shock election - and his appointment of several ferociously anti-China voices - has fuelled Chinese fears that a dramatic and destabilising downturn in relations is on the cards. Such concerns faded earlier this month after President Xi Jinping and Trump held what the White House called an extremely cordial telephone conversation. However, lingering angst means Beijing has sought to contain any criticism of Trump that might further complicate its ability to engage with Washington.  A propaganda directive leaked to the China Digital Times website last month showed Chinese newsrooms had been instructed to toe the Communist party line when covering Trump.  Any news about Trump must be handled carefully; unauthorized criticism of Trumps words or actions is not allowed, it said.  The live broadcast of Trumps inaugural speech was forbidden while news outlets were ordered only to use stories about Trump produced by Xinhua, Beijings official news agency.  Speaking in Beijing, Paul Stronski, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said it remained uncertain whether Trumps foreign policy would be steered by characters such as chief strategist Steve Bannon who were certainly looking for a showdown with China or more conventional thinkers such secretary of state Rex Tillerson.  We almost have two duelling governments here, said Stronski, a senior state department analyst under Barack Obama. Its very unclear which is the actual direction this is going to take.  Sina Weibo did not reply to a request for comment.  Additional reporting by Wang Zhen"
"48""Your correspondent is quite wrong to conclude that the vote is in any sense a blow to the authority of Justin Welby, archbishop of Canterbury (C of E synod throws out bishops report upholding traditional views on marriage, 16 February). I was present and, as part of the often unheard middle ground, was one of the house of laity who voted against taking note of the report. Though there has been a lot of interpretation and claims that this particular debate was about whether the church should endorse same-sex marriage, it was not. There is no realistic prospect of such a debate for some time. There is just too much work yet to be done, even in the Church in England, let alone in the wider Anglican Communion. Make no mistake, it weighs especially heavily with the bishops that if there had been such a vote then there would have been a cataclysmic falling in of the roof. But I, and other members of synod who are not signed-up members of anything other than Gods church, felt that the tone of the report showed a desire to kick the matter into the long grass, probably well into the next synod quinquennium. The matter is just too much in the here and now for that to be good enough. Even knowing that it will still take time and much debate, we really do need to make clear that we are determined to move forward in our understanding of marriage, sexuality and several other matters of similar sensitivity with some expedition. I doubt if anyone reacted to the archbishops final speech with anything other than a continued admiration for his love and determination, not least to ensure that all people  regardless of colour, class, wealth, social status or, yes, sexuality  are respected fully on a genuine, not mere token, equal basis. I may have voted against but this has done absolutely nothing for my growing admiration for Justins leadership and his clear authority both in the House of Bishops, in synod, in the wider church and not least in the community as a whole.Mike ToddGeneral Synod of the Church of England  The decision to refuse to take note of the bishops report on marriage and same-sex relationships presents an opportunity for courage, something that is in short supply in the Church of England. I have been lucky in knowing Una Kroll, one of the pioneers of women priests and much else. She was part of the team in my parish in south London. Then&#xa0;at St James Piccadilly, where I was rector, Archbishop Trevor Huddleston lived in the rectory. Both could be difficult. Both had courage in bucketfuls. So its time for those bishops who are personally dismayed by the report to find&#xa0;that sort of courage, and be ready to&#xa0;break ranks and marry and ordain LGBT men and women. Why not?Rev Donald ReevesDirector, the Soul of Europe, Crediton, Devon   Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"49""President Trumps executive order on immigration is an assault on Europes interests and values. It condemns entire nations and prevents refugees who have committed no crime from finding safety, making an international response to the refugee crisis all the harder. It also risks setting back co-operation on terrorism while stimulating Isiss recruitment. We&#xa0;call on the European leaders in Malta to respond in three ways:  The EU should speak with one voice in defence of international agreements and basic human rights, including the right of refuge. Seeking special deals on a country-by-country basis will simply weaken everyone.  The EU should launch a rule-of-law mission to assist EU citizens in US ports and airports. The EEAS and the member states should coordinate efforts in Washington, in order to offer the best consular protection to European citizens possible. Dual citizens should not be discriminated on the basis of their second passport.  The isolationist policies of our transatlantic neighbour should drive European nations closer together in sharing intelligence within the EU in order to enhance protection against terrorist threats. It is high time to think about European security, both internally and externally, in a more consolidated and responsible fashion. Europes place in the world is under threat from power politics, closed borders and closing societies. European leaders should not stand by as international agreements aimed at protecting the weak, the vulnerable, and those fleeing war and torture are invalidated by late night executive orders. Mark Leonard Director, European Council on Foreign RelationsCarl Bildt Former prime minister of SwedenAlexander Stubb Former prime minister of FinlandJohn Bruton Former taoiseach of IrelandPascal Lamy Former director-general of the WTO; former EU commissionerJavier Solana Former secretary general of NatoWolfgang Schssel Former chancellor of AustriaGeorge Papandreou Former prime minister of GreeceGordon Bajnai Former prime minister of HungaryHans Eichel Former finance minister of GermanyLykke Friis Former minister for climate, energy and gender equality, DenmarkAndrzej Olechowski Former foreign minister of PolandConnie Hedegaard Former European commissioner for climate actionMartin Lidegaard Former foreign minister of DenmarkBaroness Janet Royall Former leader of the opposition in the UK House of LordsAdam D Rotfeld Former foreign minister of Poland; Co-chairman of Polish-Russian Group on Difficult Matters; Commissioner of Euro-Atlantic Security InitiativeGunilla Carlsson Former international development cooperation minister of SwedenJoaqun Almunia Former vice-president of the European commissionTibor Dessewffy President, Demos HungaryKarin Forseke Chairman, Alliance Trust PlcCarlos Gaspar Member of the board of directors, Portuguese Institute of International Relations (IPRI)Sylvie Goulard Member of the European parliamentMarietje Schaake Member of the European parliamentTeresa Gouveia Trustee to the board of the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation; former foreign minister of PortugalSandra Kalniete Former foreign minister of Latvia; Member of the European parliamentRoderich Kiesewetter CDU special representative for foreign affairsHeather Grabbe Executive director, Open Society Policy InstituteUlrike Gurot Senior associate for Germany, Open Society Initiative for EuropeBassma Kodmani Executive director, Arab Reform InitiativeDavid Koranyi Director, Energy Diplomacy Initiative, Global Energy Center, The Atlantic CouncilBrigid Laffan Director of the Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies and Global Governance Programme, European University InstituteSonja Licht President, Belgrade Fund for Political ExcellenceIrene Lozano Writer; former member of the Congress of DeputiesMiguel Maduro Professor and director, Global Governance Programme at the European University Institute; former ministerKalypso Nicoladis Professor of international relations, University of OxfordChristine Ockrent Commentator and writer; Presenter of Affaires Internationales, France Culture RadioDick Oosting Former CEO, European Council on Foreign RelationsBehlul Ozkan Assistant professor, Marmara Universityaneta Ozolia Professor, University of Latvia; former director, Latvian Centre for Human RightsLapo Pistelli Senior vice-president, stakeholder relations for business development support, ENI; former deputy foreign minister of Italy Albert Rohan Austrian ambassador (retired)Daniel Sachs CEO, ProventusAleksander Smolar Chairman of the board, Stefan Batory FoundationIon Sturza Founder and chairman, Fribourg Capital; former prime minister of MoldovaHannes Swoboda Former president, Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats, European parliamentAnna Terrn Special adviser to the European commissioner for trade; President, InStrategiesNathalie Tocci Deputy director, Istituto Affari InternazionaliJose Ignacio Torreblanca Editorial director, El PasErkki Tuomioja Former foreign minister of FinlandIvan Vejvoda Director, Europe Project, Institute for Human SciencesAntonio Vitorino Lawyer; former EU commissionerAndr Wilkens Publisher and author   Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"50""One is a self-described feminist who champions trade and has opened Canadas doors to tens of thousands of Syrian refugees. The other has sought to curb abortions, threatened to tear up the Nafta trade deal and temporarily halted the admission of refugees to the US. Between them sits a border crossed by nearly 400,000 people each day  the nexus of a deeply intertwined relationship that has spawned millions of jobs and cooperation on everything from intelligence to climate change action.  On Monday, Justin Trudeau, Canadas prime minister, will travel to Washington for his first meeting with Donald Trump, in a high stakes encounter with the US president that will set the tone of Canada-US relations for years to come.  Much is on the line; while the youthful Canadian leader has gained a global reputation for his views on gender equality, LGBT rights and immigration, three-quarters of Canadas exports go the US and roughly 2.5 million Canadian jobs depend on American trade. I feel like were on a hijacked aircraft and we have to be as reasonable as possible to the pilot who is locked in the front, said John Higginbotham, a senior fellow at Carleton University and the Centre for International Governance Innovation. Were really different from the US and this has accentuated those differences.  As news of Mondays meeting broke, Trudeau hinted at the  at times competing  responsibilities he shoulders when it come to US relations. The first is, of course, to highlight Canadian values and principles and the things that keep our country strong, he told reporters on Thursday. The second responsibility that I have  is creating jobs and opportunity for Canadian citizens through the continued close integration on both sides of the border.   Related: There goes the neighborhood? Canada frets over Trump's trade agenda    Its a tightrope act familiar to Canadian prime ministers throughout history. But none have ever faced a president quite like Trump. Higginbotham pointed to the presidents recent phone call with the Australian prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull. After blasting a deal to take in refugees from an Australian detention centre, the president abruptly ended the call, telling Turnbull it was the worst call by far, according to the Washington Post. The leaked details suggest that even close allies of the US will not be spared the wrath of Trump. Australia is even more loved in Washington than Canada is because Australians follow them into every war, said Higginbotham. So for Mr Trudeau this is a big challenge. His government was not ready for this at all. It was getting ready for a third Obama term with Mrs Clinton.   Trudeau has that aura: Justin Trudeau arrives in Iqaluit, Nunavut, on Thursday.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Trudeau has that aura: Justin Trudeau arrives in Iqaluit, Nunavut, on Thursday. Photograph: Sean Kilpatrick/AP    Much of Mondays meeting is simply about jumpstarting a personal relationship between Trudeau and Trump. Canadian officials are also keen to get a sense of Trumps intentions when it comes to promises to renegotiate Nafta and reinforce the mutual benefits of the longstanding relationship between the two countries.  Senior advisers in Trumps team have suggested that Canada will not be a target in trade negotiations. But Trump could easily harm Canada if he wanted to, said Colin Robertson of the Canadian Global Affairs Institute, and will probably try to provoke Trudeau. I think Trump did that with Turnbull, I think this is part of his modus operandi.  The Canadian prime minister may have one advantage over other world leaders looking to court Trumps favour: his looks. If you look at the people that Trump has surrounded himself with over the years, they are celebrities. And they are all highly attractive people. Trudeau has that aura  both of them do, Robertson said, referring to Trudeau and his wife, Sophie Grgoire Trudeau, who is not expected to accompany Trudeau during this visit. And my view is that Canada should take advantage of whatever weve got. Across Canada  as well as among Trudeau and his inner circle, according to sources  Trump is deeply unpopular. Polls before the November election suggested some 85% of Canadians preferred Hillary Clinton. Tens of thousands of Canadians joined local women marches last month while busloads of demonstrators crossed the border to take part in marches in the US. Recent weeks have seen hundreds more in Canada protest against Trumps attempt to restrict travel from seven predominantly Muslim countries. But while several world leaders have condemned Trumps actions, the Canadian prime minister has avoided publicly criticising Trump. Instead Trudeau  whose government is currently investigating whether enforcement of Trumps travel ban on Canadian soil would violate the countrys law  has used Twitter to highlight the difference in the positions being espoused by Washington and Ottawa.  Calls have been steadily growing for Trudeau to abandon the subtleties and stand up to Trump. Mr Trudeau talks a good game, said Tom Mulcair, leader of the progressive New Democratic party in an interview. He talks with some emotion about standing up for human rights. But now hes got to start acting.   Related: Canadian Muslim grilled about her faith and view on Trump at US border stop    The issue has taken on greater importance as reports emerge of Canadian citizens being denied entry to the US after being grilled over their faith or backgrounds. It is wrong to ban people based on their religion or national origin and Justin Trudeau has the moral responsibility to make that clear in his dealings with the US president, said Mulcair. He cant try to sweep that under the rug. Washington and Ottawa have been at odds before, said Mulcair, pointing to 2003, when Canada announced it would not directly support George W Bushs war in Iraq. The Americans were very unhappy, he said. Canada correctly stood its ground and it didnt stop us from maintaining good relationships with them. Mondays meeting will probably see Trudeau seek some sort of middle ground between pursuing Canadas economic interests and standing up to Trump, said Roland Paris, a University of Ottawa professor who served as foreign policy adviser to Trudeau during his first months in office. I dont see this as an either/or choice. I think that Canadians expect their prime minister to have a working and effective relationship with the US president, no matter who is in office, and simultaneously reaffirm Canadas distinctive values. Whether this approach will alienate the president or anger Canadians calling for Trudeau to take a firmer line with Trump remains to be seen. Trumps interactions with some leaders should lead anyone to question how hell be approaching future meetings, said Paris. Theres a measure of uncertainty and unpredictability to the man."
"51"" Sophie Grgoire Trudeau, the wife of Canadas prime minister, has set off a social media firestorm by suggesting women celebrate International women Day by highlighting boys and men who promote gender equality.  The post appeared on several social media sites on Tuesday. This week, as we mark International women Day, lets celebrate the boys and men in our lives who encourage us to be who we truly are, who treat girls &amp; women with respect, and who arent afraid to speak up in front of others, Grgoire Trudeau wrote.    Related: 'A Day Without a women' faces a pivotal question  what women is it for?    She urged women to snap a photo of themselves with a male ally and share it on social media, adding: Together, we can create a movement that inspires more men to join the fight to build a better tomorrow with equal rights &amp; opportunities for everyone  because #EqualityMatters.  The post was accompanied by a photo of Grgoire Trudeau holding hands and gazing into the eyes of her husband, Justin Trudeau, a self-described feminist. Reaction was swift. While more than 13,000 people on Facebook said they liked or loved the post, thousands of others blasted Grgoire Trudeau for being tone deaf.  364 days a year I am all up to holding hands with my favourite men and creating partnerships and alliances that will support equality, read one of the top-ranked responses. But today I dont want to celebrate men. I want to remember all women who protested against not being able to vote, talked about unequal pay, stood up to the society, protecting our rights and freedoms.  Other commenters described the post as utterly ridiculous and shameful while one asked: I have to first be oppressed in patriarchy, but also spend more emotional labour comforting men who make any effort whatsoever?  Another added: Yes, lets celebrate the men who, in a world that is still dominated by patriarchal culture, give us permission (because we need it?) to be ourselves, be safe, and be heard. No thanks. My parents raised me to know that all of that is a right, not a privilege granted by men. I will instead thank the generations of women around the world who never forgot their inherent dignity and worth, helping me to preserve my own.  Some juxtaposed Grgoire Trudeaus words with her husbands actions. If your husband were a true feminist and, by your own definition isnt afraid to speak up in front of others, he would denounce Trump personally and his administrations misogyny. Until he does, hes a lip-service feminist and I cant take him seriously as a fighter for the cause.         video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    Childless: why is society so frightened of women without children?    While several world leaders have taken aim at the US president over his actions, Trudeau has avoided any public criticism of Trump.  Others, however, backed Grgoire Trudeaus viewpoint. Despite the backlash youre taking over this, Id like to say thank you for the spirit of inclusion it was clearly meant in. We need more people reaching out and building bridges, finding genuine common ground and assuming goodwill from each other if were to repair the fractures that have been spreading in our society, read one comment. Another added cheekily: Im single. Can I borrow Justin to take a picture with him?  Hours later, Grgoire Trudeau weighed in with a second post. Well, now were having a conversation! Thanks to everyone for your feedback and pics! Love it, she wrote. Our goal is gender equality, and fighting for it is going to require men and women working together  raising our boys and girls to make a difference, hand-in-hand. This is about recognizing that we should be allies on this journey, she added."
"52""Regarding the Korean wife-nanny illusion (Mums the word: assumptions about women in BBC gatecrasher clip raise hard questions, 13 March), I fail to see where the evidence for prejudice (ie, an unreasonable assertion based not on evidence) is. We all make rapid pragmatic assessments (form stereotypes) about others  it is part of our evolutionary inheritance. Without this, it would be very difficult to navigate the social world. These assumptions are based upon, among other things, experience, ie to how many Korean maids as compared with Korean wives have we been exposed? They can, of course, as in this case, be proven to be incorrect and our assumptions are then open to revision.Professor Frederick ToatesMilton Keynes   Related: If you saw a nanny in this BBC interview, what does that say about you? | Vera Chok     Caroline Davies centres on viewers class and racial prejudices, as if the debate lay with respect-worthy wife v&#xa0;lowly nanny, and as if we should beat ourselves up if we mistake one for the other. This goes deeper. Its about a man and a women. Man the expert, smart and poised (at first, anyway), looking us in the eye. women entering his awful situation, doing her best. At floor level, trying to make herself invisible, yet caring for the children, gently getting them out of the room. (Note how she manages it  the minimal fuss the kids make despite being thwarted.) Mid-chaos, she takes upon her own face and body all the physical, mental and emotional stress of the moment, sacrificing control of her own poise and presence, and does not give up until the door is closed. Brava! I hope that they are both laughing together about it now. Lets all laugh, because it is funny. Then it rather behoves the rest of us to look again.Frances Corkey ThompsonIlfracombe, North Devon  By the way, does anybody know what Professor Robert Kelly actually said about the South Korean presidency?Andrew PykettBristol  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"53""A cut to penalty rates could exacerbate the gender pay gap with a new analysis showing women earn 33% less than men when their rates of part-time work are taken into account. The left-leaning Australia Institute and Centre for Future Work has released data showing the traditional measure of the gender pay gap (which has women earning 17% less than men) for ordinary pay, equivalent full-time positions is blown out when the concentration of women in part-time work is taken into account. The data also shows women account for 55% of all employment in the retail sector and 53% in food and beverage services. The two sectors are the largest employers of women in the private-sector economy. In food and beverages 70% of women work part-time compared with 52% of men. In retail 60% of the women employed work part-time compared with 35% of men.   Related: Housekeeper writes to Malcolm Turnbull to ask him to stop penalty rate cuts    When the disproportionate number of women working part-time is taken into account, the gender pay gap increases from 17% to 33% in Australia.  Economist and the director of the Centre for Future Work, Jim Stanford, said it was impossible to separate the impact of the pure gender pay gap from the impact of women concentration in part-time work.  Both factors undermine women earnings and the penalty rate cut will have a further negative effect on that, he said. Last month the Fair Work Commission announced a decision to cut Sunday penalty rates across the hospitality, retail and pharmacy industries with some exceptions.  In hospitality penalty rates will fall from 175% to 150% on Sunday and in retail it will fall from 200% to 150% for full and part-time employees and 175% for casuals. United Voice and the SDA made submissions that a cut to penalty rates would disproportionally affect women but the Fair Work Commission rejected the proposition. The FWC decision said that to show women were disproportionately affected it would have to be shown that more female hospitality workers usually work on Sundays than males. There was no data that showed the number of hospitality workers who usually work on Sundays, by gender, it said. Further, the available data does not appear to support the proposition advanced. The FWC said that in data drawn from the ABS Working Time Arrangements series it shows that across surveys conducted in 2006, 2009 and 2012 the proportion of male employees who usually work on Sundays was greater than the proportion of female employees who usually work on Sundays. But this is all industries data, the decision said. It is not confined to the retail industry. The minister for women, Michaelia Cash, rebuked Bill Shorten on Wednesday for arguing the cuts to penalty rates would disproportionately affect women, saying his claims were not backed by data.   Related: The polling on penalty rates shows populism is not a monolithic beast | Peter Lewis    The Unions NSW assistant secretary, Emma Maiden, said the new analysis was clear and the Turnbull government was failing women. Cuts to penalty rates for retail and hospitality workers will impose a higher burden on women workers, she said. These women can least afford it and certainly dont deserve it.  The Turnbull government should show their support for working women and their commitment to equality by agreeing to overturn this pay cut. The latest Guardian Essential Poll showed 56% of respondents disapproved of the penalty rates cut and 57% of the survey said they believed the most likely result of the change will be bigger profits for business, not more jobs in retail and hospitality. Only 24% of people think the cut will result in business employing more workers, which was a key part of the reasoning behind the FWCs decision."
"54""Lena Dunham: keep on protesting I think the activism and organisation thats happening now is showing protest matters, calling your representatives matters, becoming involved in community organisations matters, sending your donations every month matters. It has never mattered more to show up with your money, with your body, with your time and with your voice than it does right now. Lots of people had valid criticisms of the women March, but it was the largest global protest weve seen and thats because every single person made the choice to take time off work, to give of themselves, to give their bodies and fill space and show they wanted to say no. That scares people and even if right now were not seeing the result we want, the government has been warned. They understand they are not supported. They are fighting an uphill battle against women and allies of equality in all of its forms.Lena Dunham is an actor, writer, producer and director Nicola Sturgeon: great childcare is where it starts Its a source of frustration that, decades on from legislation that was supposed to pave the way for equality of the sexes, too many gaps remain. I have made equality a key feature of my government, with a gender-balanced cabinet, one of very few in the developed world. However, if there is one specific policy area which can permanently advance the cause of gender equality, I believe the answer lies not in the workplace itself, but in the early years. Delivering high quality childcare as widely as possible is, I believe, fundamental to achieving the kind of equal society that empowers women. It is a simple fact that, for many women, the barrier to career advancement comes when they are faced with juggling the competing demands of a job and raising a family. And in too many cases, the lack of adequate childcare becomes a decisive factor in preventing women from continuing their careers. Improving access and affordability in childcare is not an easy challenge  and of itself will not solve all gender equality issues. But it is a challenge which must be met if we are to deliver a society which truly has equality of opportunity for men and women.Nicola Sturgeon MSP is First Minister of Scotland   s March in London take a breather.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Signs of the times: protesters on the women March in London take a breather. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images    Naheed Farid: introduce bottom to top economic development I represent women in the Afghanistan parliament, in a country that is one of the worst places to live as a women. We suffer from violence, insecurity and lack of access to basic rights, such as education and health. We tried many things, such as investing in civil society organisations, education and democratic processes, but still Afghanistan stays the same. My analysis is that in order to ensure women rights and equality in Afghanistan, and generally all around the world, we need to involve women in the production process, empowering women economically. We also need policies to make sure that the process of development is bottom to top, completely the opposite of what is practised right now. women inclusion in political, economic and social aspects of development can stabilise society by consistently empowering women and involving them in high-level decision-making processes.Naheed Farid was elected MP in 2010 at the age of 27 Nomboniso Gasa: civil action to defend our freedom from misogynistic world leaders As I watched Donald Trumps inauguration, I noticed something familiar in the body language between him and Melania. My mind flipped back to President Jacob Zumas inauguration in 2009. He didnt even look back to see whether his wife was comfortable. She trotted behind, with shoes that were too big for her. She could have tripped and he would not have noticed. People have written about Trump and Zumas disdain for the judiciary, the constitution, media and civil liberties. But they are similar in other ways, including their public devaluing of women. Trumps tape about women throwing themselves at you, if you are famous, reminded me of Zumas statement when accused of rape. I am not afraid of women. They are attracted to me. Why would I rape? Zuma must be envying Trump, though. He is unable to reverse the Constitutional Court decision enabling women to make choices about reproductive rights, bodily integrity and freedom of choice. His ANC is unlikely to garner enough votes to change the Bill of Rights. Contesting these men requires a careful unmasking of their devious narratives, combined with civic action in defence of our freedoms. This must be a well-planned and sustained struggle against misogynistic bullies.Nomboniso Gasa is a South African researcher, writer and analyst on land, politics, gender and cultural issues Laura Bates: sex and relationships education for all schoolchildren There is a single, clear action that experts agree could make a substantial difference. For the past decade, campaigners, teachers, parents and pupils alike have urged successive governments to implement compulsory sex and relationships education (SRE) for all young people, including topics such as consent, healthy relationships, pornography, gender stereotypes and LGBT rights and relationships. Schools are currently only obliged to teach the biological basics of reproduction by the age of 15, with no compulsory coverage of issues, such as consent. This would help protect vulnerable children who may already be experiencing sexual abuse. It would create change for the many girls who report unwanted sexual touching  a form of sexual assault. And, by educating young people about their rights and responsibilities, it could have an impact on the broader problem of sexual violence. With 85,000 women raped annually and two women per week killed by a current or former partner in England and Wales, this is an urgent priority. We know that young people today face a bombardment of influences, from sexting to pornography. If we teach children how to read maps so they can find their way, and how to do maths so they can work out their change in a shop, why do we leave them shockingly ill-equipped to navigate sexual relationships, a similarly universal life experience? With 43% of young people reporting they dont receive any SRE at all, we are failing them and letting wider society down as well.Laura Bates is founder of the Everyday Sexism Project   s rights and to protest against Donald Trump, in Seattle.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Join the gang: women hold hands and share personal stories during the Dress Like A women rally and march, held to support women rights and to protest against Donald Trump, in Seattle. Photograph: David Ryder/Reuters    Anne-Marie Imafidon: more women in science and tech jobs reflected in TV soaps Ive always watched a lot of TV and when I was younger watched EastEnders. As an east Londoner it felt close enough to reality that I would get excited when they filmed on location  trying to point out landmarks and guess the road. Soaps dont fully reflect reality, but they do try to stay current. These days most characters have a mobile phone and technology sometimes features in storylines. In the battle for gender equality Id like to see the soaps embrace some new careers for their characters  particularly the female ones. Wheres Dot? Oh, shes just taking air quality measurements in the square for her PhD thesis, shell meet us at the Queen Vic. Normalising science and tech-related careers can start with a female character or two deciding to leave work at the chippy for a job at a digital start-up. Someone in Hollyoaks might strike up an affair with someone theyve met on an evening coding course (affairs happen all the time on soaps). Seeing these characters have breakfast, and fight with family while enjoying science, technology, engineering and mathematics (Stem) careers will work against the one-sided portrayals of Stem characters that we see in films and on TV. The small screen can do what Hollywood is beginning to do with films, like Hidden Figures  the story of African-American women who helped Nasa.Anne-Marie Imafidon MBE campaigns to get women into science, technology, engineering and maths Li Maizi: create an international force against the censoring of women voices The answer for me is chasing gender equality in China. It has become my daily life, making noises against all the discrimination. And when we meet the backlash, we have to stand together and fight back. As a women, I have no country: my country is the whole world. So I will also criticise Donald Trump, who is a straight man cancer. In China, the space for civil movement is becoming more narrow. One of the most powerful Weibo [Chinas Twitter] accounts, Feminism Voice, has been blocked for publishing an article about the planned women strike against Trump in the US. Thus, no single issue belongs to one country, we must fight together against the censoring of women voices.Li Maizi is one of Chinas feminist five, detained for more than a month in 2015 for organising a protest against sexual harassment on buses and subways Catherine Mayer: champion more shared parenting Theres no single fix because the mechanisms keeping women down are intertwined. However, one of the seven core objectives of the women Equality Party  equal parenting and caregiving  is capable on its own of creating huge change. If we can shake the idea that childcare is primarily a mothers responsibility, if we learn to value the unpaid labour now primarily undertaken by women, then we also unpick some of the causes of the gender pay gap. There are also ways to speed the process. In 1975, when 90% of Icelandic women left jobs and homes for the day, their male compatriots learned just how much women do. Iceland now ranks as the worlds most gender-equal country. Im helping to organise a women Day Off in the UK next year.Catherine Mayer is the co-founder of the women Equality Party and author of Attack of the Fifty Foot Women: How Gender Equality Can Save the World!     Magic circle: protesters chant against gender-based violence at their camp on La Puerta del Sol square in Madrid, Spain. Photograph: EPA    Stella Creasy: dont be a click-avist, get stuck in The change we need to make is mobilisation. We have to sound the alarm. The worst thing we can do is despair. My message is, dont stand aside, get stuck in. Dont be a click-avist. Keep asking: What next? If you go on a march and think: Thats the job done, they win. A backlash is a reaction, so we have to keep taking action. I keep saying to people, I adore Martin Luther King, but he was wrong when he said: The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards progress. It doesnt, unless you fight for it.Stella Creasy is MP for Walthamstow. Join her Feminist Action Network (stella@workingforwalthamstow.org.uk) Liv Little: economic autonomy for women of colour The face of feminism Im surrounded by is young and fresh. Feminism has the potential to be a bright, vibrant movement. But its difficult. There are so many pressing issues for women. Whats really important is economic empowerment. I think as a women of colour its important that we are running our own businesses, able to support each other and generating our own income to support other young women of colour who are coming up in the world. As a black female graduate youre likely to earn a lot less than your white male counterparts. Youre increasingly seeing women of colour in positions of power, but there are still not enough of us in prominent positions.Liv Little is editor-in-chief at gal-dem Caitlin Moran: embrace our weakness and silliness You know what make us strong? All the things you think are a hindrance. Our strength is our weakness. Our love of silly things to wear. Our love of jokes. On the women March, there were millions of weak women with buggies, with elderly relatives  women who are disabled, or from minority groups  wearing pink hats and holding placards. And our strength is, you cant send armed police into a crowd like that. Theres no way to spin that footage. You cant pretend its violent, radical extremists. Theres no excuse to break it up. The weaker, sillier and funnier we are, the more impossible it is to demonise us, or stop us, as so many protests have been stopped and demonised before. As things go backwards, we think: We cant fight this, and the answer is  we mustnt fight it. Fighting is how its always been done before. They know how to stop fighters. But these old, white, straight, angry men? They dont know how to stop joy, humour, knitted pink hats and buggies. We are the force theyve never seen before. They have nothing in their box to counter this. This is our strength. And we have it in endless amounts. We are the 52%. And we can knit and joke the fuck out of the revolution.Caitlin Moran is an author and columnist     Stepping up: women on the march in Montevideo, Uruguay. Photograph: Raul Martinez/EPA    Susie Orbach: defeat the merchants of body hatred In a time of threat, the places we might be able to call home, our bodies, are being ripped apart by commercial pressures. They bear down on labias (too messy), faces (too tired), lips (too small), eyes (too hooded), breasts (too small, droopy or large) For each of these crazy designations, there are surgeries sold as empowering, sold as safe, sold as solutions. But whats the problem and who is generating it? Control girls and women bodies  whether by the purveyors of beauty, the cultural enforcers of female genital cutting, the anti-choice gang in the White House  and insecurity is induced. Give girls as young as three cosmetic surgery games that divert their dreaming and imaginative energy into pursuits that hurt what it means to be a girl, and you ensure big profits and big body preoccupations for a lifetime. Its time to dare to feel OK in our bodies as they age and change.Susie Orbach is a psychotherapist, analyst and writer Paris Lees: real feminism excludes nobody  If your push for social justice excludes women of colour  or disabled women, trans women, sex workers, Muslims, Jews, poor people  you dont want equality, you want privilege. Promoting women of the same class and colour while ignoring and speaking over women less privileged than yourself isnt feminism. Its supremacism. I come from a mixed-race family. I like to think I know a little bit about racism. But Im not black. So I listen. I follow feminists from minority backgrounds on social media: Reni Eddo-Lodge, Nesrine Malik, Janet Mock, Phyll Opoku-Gyimah, Fatima Manji, Roxane Gay. Most women voted for Hillary in the US election, but a significant proportion  white women without a college degree  voted for Trump. In the end, their votes swung it. This is what can happen when women dont pull together. So lets pull together. Fascism is back. Women are leading the resistance, but if we really want decency to prevail, its time to revive another idea from the mists of time: solidarity.Paris Lees is a journalist and transgender rights activist     Getting the message: a wall of signs outside the White House in Washington. Photograph: John Minchillo/AP    Mariella Frostrup: include boys in the conversation Ive been a feminist since my lungs first filled with air, but Im weary of war and eager for a coalition. In my small corner of the western world its hard to find a man who doesnt believe his daughter, his wife, his sister, his mother or his colleagues to be his equal, yet we continue to mark out our battle lines on a gendered basis. No social revolution in the history of mankind has succeeded without the participation of both sexes so its time to invite the guys aboard. Instead of car ads that accept a women can control a vehicle (doh!) Im more hopeful for one that entices a man to try a vacuum cleaner. Our ability to participate in a mans world is beyond dispute, but the jurys still out on our success in enticing men into what was once our domain. The proportion of women doing the worlds unpaid work has barely changed. The only difference is that most women today are holding down two jobs. It is stress levels, not our incomes, that are rising. Expectations of both sexes have changed beyond measure and the conversation needs to stop being so one-sided, which is why weve set up Great Men, opening conversations with boys in secondary schools exploring masculinity and gender issues. If we want to eradicate misogyny, we need to make sure boys are given the support and emotional investment they need.Mariella Frostrup is a broadcaster, columnist and co-founder of the Great Initiative Lisa Randall: end the fear women feel An issue for women throughout the world that is implicitly played down by lack of adequate attention is fear. The topic is broad and the specifics are difficult to address through existing systems, but whether it is physical violence, online stalking, harassment, or unwanted encounters at work or in schools, women are prevented from living their best possible lives and from contributing in the most significant ways. Current systems address only very explicit danger. Even when the attacks are merely upsetting, the resultant loss of diverse voices  online and elsewhere  because of women reluctance to be subject to insults or insinuations, is a loss to us all.Lisa Randall is professor of science at Harvard University"
"55""Denying equal pension rights to a same-sex husband  as opposed to a wife  amounts to direct, sexual discrimination, the supreme court has been told in a test case which could affect thousands of couples. The claim at the UKs highest court on Wednesday is being brought by John Walker, a former cavalry officer, who is determined to win pension rights for his husband.    Related: Who are 2017's LGBT heroes? Tell us about the activists creating change    Walker, 65, wants to ensure that, should he die first, his 52-year-old husband will be adequately provided for. If he was married to a women she would be entitled to receive about 45,000 a year for life. Under current law, Walkers husband would receive about 1,000 a year, his lawyer said. Lawyers for the human rights organisation Liberty, which is representing Walker, hope to persuade five justices at the court in London to overturn a previous ruling against him.  Liberty has said ensuring a same-sex husband enjoys the same pension rights as a wife could dramatically change the lives of thousands of couples.  Martin Chamberlain QC, representing Walker, told the court: This is direct discrimination. They have chosen to treat Mr Walkers partner less favourably than that of a heterosexual married man. The marriage does not have to have taken place during the period of service. The only thing that matters is that the person claiming pension at the time of death [of the retired employee] is the spouse. Walker lost at the court of appeal in 2015 when judges ruled his claim could not be enforced because it applied to a period before gay civil partnerships were recognised by law.  After leaving the army, Walker worked for chemicals group Innospec for more than 20 years and retired in 2003. He made the same contributions to the pension scheme as his heterosexual colleagues. He has been with his husband, a former computer executive, since 1993. The Civil Partnership Act 2004 came into force in December 2005. They entered into a civil partnership in January 2006, which was later converted into marriage. The claim, according to Liberty, challenges an exemption in the Equality Act that lets employers exclude same-sex partners from spousal benefits paid into a pension fund before December 2005, when civil partnerships became legal. It argues that the exemption is discriminatory.  Innospecs opposition to paying the larger sum is supported by the Department for Work and Pensions. Most private occupational pension schemes treat surviving same-sex spouses as equal to surviving other-sex spouses, but Innospecs does not, relying on an exemption in the Equality Act. Walkers lawyers argue that the exemption should not apply because it constitutes discrimination based on sexual orientation, which breaches his human rights. Commenting before the hearing, Walker said: The government should be ashamed that, in 2017, I and so many others are being forced to live with the worry that our loved ones wont be provided for when were gone, solely because of our sexuality.  My husband and I have been together for 24 years. During that time, I also gave more than two decades of my life to Innospec, paying in exactly the same amount into the company pension fund as my heterosexual colleagues. How can it be right that my husband will get practically nothing but, if I were to divorce him and marry the very first women I see, she would be immediately entitled to the full spousal pension? Its not just unfair  its absurd.  Emma Norton, Libertys lawyer representing Walker, said: We hope the supreme court will drive the law into the 21st century and take a huge step towards equal pension rights for same-sex spouses and civil partners. This archaic loophole has no place in the UK in 2017, and it is disgraceful that the Department for Work and Pensions continues to spend taxpayers money fighting to preserve it. There can be no price tag on equality. The case is being heard alongside claims by a retired part-time judge over his accumulated pension rights.  Supporting the claim, the equal rights campaigner Peter Tatchell said: It is appalling that John has to go to court to remedy this clear-cut discrimination against same-sex couples in pension inheritance rules. His partner, and thousands of other gay people in a similar situation, will suffer huge financial losses under the current regulations. This legal bid is a simple matter of equality and fairness. The surviving partners in same-sex civil partnerships and civil marriages should have the same pension inheritance rights as the surviving spouses in heterosexual marriages. "
"56""A New Zealand primary school has abolished gendered uniforms for its pupils and replaced them with shorts, a kilt and trousers that can be worn by either sex. The move came after complaints from female students who resisted having to wear a skirt. Dunedin North Intermediate in the South Island has more than 200 pupils aged between 10 and 13 years. In late 2015 a number of female students began asking why they were restricted to wearing kilts to school, saying the archaic uniform reinforced traditional and outdated gender stereotypes.   Related: Schoolgirls in New Zealand told to lengthen skirts to 'stop distracting male staff and pupils'    The school agreed the girls could wear trousers, and a small number of girls started wearing the boys uniform in 2016. However this option added further complications, with the girls who chose to wear trousers bring teased for dressing like boys. The first changes seemed like a bit of a punishment actually, said Heidi Hayward, principal of Dunedin North Intermediate school. We said you dont have to wear the skirt, but you have to wear the traditional boys uniform, that looks very much like a boys uniform, and be subject to these constant questions and jokes about whether youre a boy or a girl. The uniform has now been extended to include five options, able to be worn by either male or female students - shorts, long shorts, a kilt, trousers or culottes. So far none of the male students have chosen to wear the kilt, but it would be totally fine if they did, said Hayward. I would take offence to being told I had to wear a skirt to work every day because I am female, so this is about being responsive to the kids telling us we are perpetuating gender stereotypes, and what is going on in society at the moment, she said. Hopefully the flow-on effect from this is kids at our school who are questioning their gender or sexuality, hear that message that it is ok and we value diversity and being comfortable in your own skin. Although the reaction from the students at Dunedin North was low-key, Hayward said many parents were confused and had questions about the new options. An 11-year-old female pupil was one of the students campaigning for gendered uniforms to be abolished. Since the new rules were introduced, she has chosen to wear shorts to school instead of a kilt. I found it sexist that girls were told to wear skirts or kilts, and boys got to wear shorts or trousers, she said. It felt good that we now have choices. It is not really a big deal but it was about feeling comfortable, and we have that now. Hayward said her school still had segregated toilets for boys and girls, but this was a funding issue, which she anticipated being addressed in the near-future.  The move comes after scores of schools in Britain introduced gender neutral uniform policies in 2016. "
"57""Wear red, down tools and buy local: that is the action women in the UK are being urged to take on International women Day as part of a global strike to highlight gender rights and abuses.  The one day without a women mobilisation is urging women to take the day off from paid and unpaid labour on Wednesday, only buy local and wear red in solidarity with the global women movement.  In London, where it will be budget day, there will be a protest outside the family court in Holborn at 9.45am, followed by a speak out outside parliament, said Nina Lopez, a coordinator for the Global women Strike.  The movement in England is adopting a broom as its symbol  because together the bristles are strong - and is inviting women to make a loud noise at 6pm in coordination with other women around the world.  We have been working towards a global women strike since 2000, so it is so exciting that this is happening, Lopez said. International women Day feels very different this year. Women are spearheading a global movement for change  this is feminism of the 99%. Its not just about breaking through the glass ceiling or getting in the boardroom, its about recognising the value of caring and unpaid work. Women throughout the world are doing double the work [of men] because the majority do the work of the home, yet they are still being paid less. That has to end.  Ahead of IWD, a march in London on Sunday, attended by the mayor, Sadiq Khan, is expected to involve thousands.  Under the 2017 IWD banner of #BeBoldForChange the London #March4Women event is kicking off a wave of events, which have gained momentum since the global women March in January.    Related: Malala Yousafzai's UN speech set to music for International Women's Day    Khan  who is taking the unusual step of shutting Tower Bridge for the march  said it was unacceptable that in 2017 in London, the most progressive city in the world, your gender can still determine how much you get paid. He urged men and boys to join the march, which has been organised by Care International. Equal rights is not just a fight for women  all of us need to stand in solidarity with our mothers, sisters, daughters and friends to say that discrimination, in all shapes and forms, will not be tolerated, he said. Ahead of International women Day, I am honoured to stand shoulder to shoulder with Londoners from all backgrounds to spread the message that London is open and a place where we celebrate everyone, from every walk of life, regardless of their gender. Up to 2 million people around the world joined the women March for equality in January at the start of Donald Trumps presidency. Organisers of the women March in London, which involved 100,000, have endorsed the international women strike. They will join Sundays march, which will begin with a mass karaoke rendition of Aretha Franklins Respect.  Helen Pankhurst, the great-granddaughter of the suffragette leader Emmeline, will join Bianca Jagger and artists including Emeli Sand, Billy Bragg and the Olympic Suffragettes.  Our solidarity and the fight for the equal rights of women should not end at the shores of our own country, Pankhurst said. Were urging women to join us ahead of International women Day, in solidarity with the many refugees who have trekked hundreds of miles to find safety, many of them mothers, forced to carry their children from one danger zone to the next. Laurie Lee, the head of Care International said the march would be an unforgettable afternoon hearing from a star lineup of outspoken feminists, refugee women, celebrities and global activists. The roots of International women Day go back to a mass mobilisation in 1908, when 15,000 women marched through New York City demanding the right to vote, better pay and shorter working hours. The first official National women Day march, led by the Socialist Party of America, took place a year later on 28 February. IWD moved to 8 March in 1913, and was recognised by the United Nations in 1975. With the World Economic Forum estimating that the global gender gap wont close until 2186, advocates argue that IWD is needed more than ever.  The UK parliament marked IWD with a debate on Thursday which gave MPs an opportunity to reflect on the progress that has been made and how much more there is still to do, said the conservative MP Maria Miller, the chair of the women and equalities select committee.  She cited the introduction of compulsory sex and relationship education in secondary schools, announced this week, as an example of a growing cross-party movement supporting women rights.  There is now a recognition that women issues can be supported, advocated for and taken on regardless of political party. I think MPs understand what they can achieve on these issues if they work together.  She added: I dont think its a coincidence that we have a female prime minister.  There is also an International Mens Day  focusing on men and boys health, improving gender relations and showcasing positive male role models  which takes place on 19 November every year and is marked in 60 countries. "
"58""Women in more than 50 countries will go on strike from paid and unpaid labour on Wednesday while millions more will be taking part in direct action on what is set to be one of the most political International women Days in history. From Thailand to Poland, the United States to Australia, the first International women Strike will see action on both the industrial and domestic fronts, with participants keen to show solidarity with an energised global women movement.    Related: International Women's Day: protests, activism and a strike  live    We are united, we are international  and we are everywhere, said Klementyna Suchanow, a Poland-based organiser of the International women Strike, adding that the walkout would put governments and institutions under pressure by giving women a voice that has long been ignored. We are an army of women across the globe and we are no longer asking to be listened to. The world is being forced to listen to us. The theme for 2017s International women Day  which celebrates the social, economic, cultural and political achievements of women  is #BeBoldForChange.  Organisers of the International women Strike have joined forces with coordinators of the women March and hundreds of human rights and women campaigners to capitalise on momentum in the movement in the wake of Donald Trumps election. Up to 2 million people around the world marched for equality in January the day after his inauguration. The women March  which now has organisers across 200 cities in 80 countries  has called on supporters not to engage in paid or unpaid labour and only spend money in small and female-owned businesses.    Related: Wear red, down tools and buy local for International Women's Day    Recognising that the poor financial situation and rigid work laws mean many will not be able to take part in a physical strike, organisers are urging supporters to wear red, a colour historically associated with the labour movement, in solidarity.  In other countries women will wear black, or different colours, while the focus on issues from femicide to abortion will be decided in each nation. The International women Strike, meanwhile, is suggesting that women boycott local misogynists, stop shopping, go on a sex strike, block roads and streets, and take part in marches or pickets. Women are also encouraged to leave creative and impassioned out of office replies, talking about why they are striking. The strike is partly inspired by the women of Iceland, where in 1975 25,000 women gathered on the streets of Reykjavik and 90% of the female population did not go to work, cook, clean or take care of children. Last year thousands of female employees across Iceland walked out of workplaces at 2.38pm to protest against earning less than men.   s group to promote International women Day in Puerta del Sol square in Madrid, Spain.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Red shoes and flowers placed by members of a women group to promote International women Day in Puerta del Sol square in Madrid, Spain. Photograph: Paul White/AP    In the US, where the feminist movement has been galvanised by the election of a president who has bragged of grabbing women by the pussy, organisers are expecting small demonstrations across the country, with some major gatherings of strikers expected in Chicago and Washington DC.  We have the sense that people will spontaneously make a call for demonstrations in their town, said Tithi Bhattacharya, an associate professor at Purdue University and one of the marchs organisers. I think the most exciting thing about 8 March is the way its being interpreted in diverse ways by different groups. In some parts of the US the impact of the strike is already evident. In two districts of North Carolina and Virginia, so many teachers announced plans to miss work on Wednesday that school closures were announced. In the district of Alexandria, 300 staff requested the day off.   Related: Sex bans, strength and solidarity: women strikes through the ages    The day of action comes amid a recognition among campaigners that mass, headline-grabbing actions are the key to furthering the cause of women rights around the world. If we only fight our own battles  if that is abortion in Poland, or femicide in South America  we are only fighting one finger of the giant, said Suchanow. And we need to be taking down the giant, not the finger. Suchanow joined in the mass women strike in Poland last October, in which up to 100,000 women dressed in black took to the streets to protest against a near-total ban on abortion. Following the march, Polands parliament overwhelmingly rejected the ban drafted by the ruling Law and Justice party.     Polish women and some male supporters blow horns while raising a coathanger, a symbol of illegal abortions, during a protest in Warsaw last October. Photograph: Czarek Sokolowski/AP    On Wednesday in Britain the one day without a women mobilisation will urge women to refrain from labour. In London, there will be a protest outside the family court in Holborn at 9.45am, followed by a speak out outside parliament, said Nina Lopez, a coordinator for the International women Strike.  In Argentina many women will strike. Last year there was a national protest after a week of extreme violence against women including the violent rape and murder of 16-year-old Luca Prez in Mar Del Plata.         video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    International women Day: how can you support the global strike?    In Peru women are demanding an end to violence against women in all its forms: physical, sexual, emotional and economic, and marching in 10 regions, said Jill Ruiz. This is a historical action in our country and worldwide. Solidarity is our weapon.  In Brazil, where actions are planned in more than 70 cities, organiser Mariana Bastos said the focus would be on femicide.  Actions will range from a total strike at home and in the workplace to an hours strike at lunch, where people will gather with their colleagues to discuss equality issues. Supporters are being asked to wear violet in solidarity. We are a huge country and it is a very complex picture, but each city and each women will decide how they take part, said Bastos. In Kenya, women groups joined with government officials from the Nairobi county department of gender and health to mark the day on Tuesday  holding a procession and forum with speeches and testimonials, as well as offering free HIV testing and free cervical cancer screening at the event, said Ritah Mutheu Muia, founder of the women group Her Voice.    Related: International Women's Day: tell us about a battle you've won | Sarah Marsh    Following the theme of this year I felt women in Kenya are now boldly standing up for their rights, that more men are joining us in this journey for equality and equity - they are taking a stand and being bold for women, she said. Women have taken the reins and are the ones spearheading change in society. The days origins go back to a mass mobilisation in 1908, when 15,000 women marched through New York City demanding the right to vote, better pay and shorter working hours. The first official National women Day march, led by the Socialist Party of America, took place a year later on 28 February.  International women Day moved to 8 March in 1913, and was recognised by the United Nations  which now decrees an annual theme  in 1975."
"59""Labour has urged the Conservatives to carry out a gender audit of its tax and spending policies, as the shadow equalities minister, Sarah Champion, published analysis showing that 86% of the burden of austerity since 2010 has fallen on women. Champion said research carried out by the House of Commons library revealed that women were paying a disproportionate price for balancing the governments books.   Related: The Conservatives promised change, but delivered more injustice | Aditya Chakrabortty    Yesterday, the prime minister and chancellor talked up the significance of International women Day yet their warm words have amounted to nothing, she said on Thursday. Women are still bearing the brunt of this Tory governments failed austerity agenda  with the 86% figure on women remaining unchanged since last year. Things are just as bad as ever for women under this Tory government. Labour calls on the government to urgently publish analysis of the true impact of their budgets and spending announcements on women and to explain how they intend to reverse this disproportionate impact. The analysis is based on tax and benefit changes since 2010, with the losses apportioned to whichever individual within a household receives the payments.  In total, the analysis estimates that the cuts will have cost women a total of 79bn since 2010, against 13bn for men. It shows that, by 2020, men will have borne just 14% of the total burden of welfare cuts, compared with 86% for women. The chancellor, Philip Hammond, highlighted a 30m package of support for women in Wednesdays budget.  It included: 20m to tackle domestic violence and abuse; 5m to fund events marking the centenary of women suffrage; and another 5m to fund returnships for parents who have been out of the workforce. But many of the cuts announced in earlier years by former chancellor George Osborne, including a four-year freeze on many in-work benefits and reductions in the universal credit, are yet to bite. Hammond has loosened Osbornes fiscal rules, but he will press ahead with most of the pre-planned austerity measures  though the tax credits rebellion forced the government to promise not to look for fresh savings from the welfare bill in future years.   Related: Extra 20m pledged in budget for battle against domestic violence    May had earlier taunted Labour with the fact that the recent Copeland byelection saw a Labour man (Jamie Reed) replaced in the Commons by a Conservative women (Trudy Harrison).  May has previously pointed out that while Labour champions gender equality, it is the Tory party that has delivered two female prime ministers. There has never been a female chancellor of the exchequer. Mary-Ann Stephenson, co-director of the women Budget Group lobby group, condemned the Tories in light of the new research. This reveals that the governments aim to help the just about managing is incompatible with the chancellors decision to continue with our plan, she said. The 1.8m working families receiving tax credits are the just about managing, but rising inflation and a freeze in tax credit rates means a sharper fall in their real-terms income. The chancellors decision to continue with the decisions of his predecessor to cut social security for these low income families, at the same time as cutting taxes, is effectively a transfer from the purses of poorer women into the wallets of richer men. Many female MPs wore purple or green on Wednesday to highlight the fact that the budget was being held on International women Day, but some subsequently pointed out that the debate was dominated by men. Alison McGovern, Labour MP for Wirral South, said: It was the best part of three hours before any women spoke in the debate.  But the insufficient funding for care has a massive impact on the many thousands of low-paid women who work in care. The government publishes an analysis of the differential impact of its policies at different points on the income scale, but does not carry out a gender analysis. However, the Conservatives have been keen to court the female vote with a series of policies, including a pledge of 30 hours a week free childcare in England, despite warnings from nurseries in some areas that the government funding will not cover the costs of providing the extra hours. The prime minister hosted a women day reception at No 10 Downing Street on Thursday night. "
"60""A slight note of exasperation crept into Justin Trudeaus voice, suggesting that this was a topic he had broached many times before. Im going to keep saying loud and clearly that I am a feminist until it is met with a shrug, he declared to an audience at the United Nations in New York. His words sparked delight around the world. But one year on, Trudeaus heady promises have run into the realities of government, prompting the question: has electing a self-described feminist to helm the country translated into real change for Canadian women? The answer seems to be no  or at least, not yet. This month, Oxfam Canada released its first ever feminist scorecard, envisioned as a tool to track Trudeaus progress. The group concluded that some 17 months after taking power, the prime minister and his teams bold feminist rhetoric has not yet translated into tangible spending decisions. No one doubts that scale of the challenge: as many as 4,000 Indigenous women have gone missing or been murdered in the past three decades, while the number of Indigenous women in prison has rocketed. Child care costs in the country rank among the highest in the OECD, and a persistent pay gap has sent the country tumbling to 35th place in the World Economic Forums global gender gap rankings. According to Oxfam, solid progress has been demonstrated in just one area: women representation and leadership. You cant overstate the importance of the first gender-balanced cabinet in Canadian history, said Lauren Ravon of Oxfam. The government fared worst in the category of jobs, where Oxfam noted that no actions have been taken to address a gender wage gap that ranks among the worst in the OECD or to ensure living wages for the working poor, the majority of whom are women.  While the government has committed to tabling pay equity legislation for federally regulated sectors, it has said it will not do so until 2018. Still, Oxfam was hopeful that the government would steadily improve its performance on the scorecard in the coming years. For the most part weve seen good first signs. Things are moving in the right direction, said Ravon. As the Liberal government embarks on the second year of its mandate, it is time to turn feminist words into action.  Among those who have been left waiting are Indigenous women and girls, said Pamela Palmater, who heads the centre for indigenous governance at Torontos Ryerson University. Trudeau came into power vowing to overhaul the fraught relationship between Canada and its Indigenous people, rattling off promises that ranged from extending the right to self-determination to making significant investments in First Nation education. To date, little progress has been made. Trudeau is failing on literally every promise to Indigenous peoples generally and Indigenous women and girls specifically, said Palmater.      Justin is practicing token feminism. He made his cabinet half women, but these are women who are already privileged and in power, said Pamela Palmater of Ryerson University. Photograph: Adrian Wyld/AP    While the government did launch the long-awaited inquiry into the thousands of missing and murdered women in August, some seven months later the inquiry has yet to hold its first public hearing. Justin is practicing token feminism, said Palmater. He made his cabinet half women, but these are women who are already privileged and in power. So, essentially, he shared some power around a small group of elites.  Palmater is not the only skeptic: others have asked if Trudeau is a fake feminist and questioned the depth of his commitment to the idea.  Many were incensed by Trudeaus launch of a roundtable on female entrepreneurs alongside Donald Trump last month.  How could the prime minister possibly sit down and discuss women in the workforce with President Trump without first denouncing his misogynist comments? Sheila Malcolmson, an MP with Canadas New Democratic party, asked in parliament.  Her party has consistently pushed Trudeau on the issue of gender equality, putting forward a bill last year that would have forced parties to nominate a greater number of female candidates to parliament. Despite the fact that just 26% of the MPs elected in Canadas last election were women  a proportion that lags behind countries such as Uganda, Guyana and Laos  Trudeaus Liberals were among those who voted against the bill, citing now cancelled plans to reform the countrys electoral system. For Sharmeen Khan of No One Is Illegal Toronto, Trudeaus reputation as a feminist has become an obstacle as the organisation attempts to draw attention to the governments continued use of policies that marginalise some of the countrys most vulnerable, from temporary foreign workers to migrants without status.  It is incredibly frustrating, said Khan. Its been really difficult for us to put heat on this government or pressure them because I feel people have been like, Why are you criticising this government?, even though the policies havent changed since they got in. Some worry that might be exactly the point. So far, the prime minister has shown little interest in what Kathryn Trevenen, a University of Ottawa professor, described as the radical edge of feminism, which aims to tackle overlapping injustices and systems of oppression  a critical gap in a country where more than half of those living in poverty in Vancouver and Toronto belong to racial minorities and where nearly half of the children in foster care in the country are Indigenous.  Instead, Trudeaus feminism is a version that is much more palatable to the mainstream, said Trevenen, focusing on women who are mostly straight, white, middle to upper class and cisgender. I think that Justin Trudeaus commitment to feminism comes out of a historically liberal type of feminism, one that often gets called white feminism these days, that focuses on giving rights and privileges to only a very narrow group of women. The distinction means its not clear that Justin Trudeau is living up to the hype really, and living up to the name feminist, said Trevenen. If someone is going to claim the mantle of feminism, I want them to claim the mantle of that feminist  the intersectional feminism that looks for profound structural change  not the sort of white liberal feminism that involves the assimilation of a few privileged women into institutions of power. "
"61""The co-founder of a new organization that campaigns against gender-based violence in Jamaica has been arrested after posting the names of alleged sexual predators on social media.  Latoya Nugent, a prominent LGBT activist and co-founder of the Tambourine Army, was arrested late on Monday and charged with three counts of breaching the countrys Cybercrimes Act.   Related: 'Tambourine Army' hits back against sexual violence in the Caribbean    Jamaica constabulary force communications officer Stephanie Lindsay said Nugent was charged specifically with using a computer for malicious intent.  She posted information on social media reportedly maligning several individuals as sexual predators, Lindsay said. Nugents arrest came just days after she helped organize the countrys first major protest against sexual abuse. Her group, Tambourine Army, has urged survivors of sexual abuse to reveal the name of their attackers. Her supporters say Nugents detention represents a threat to freedom of speech and have started a GoFundMe campaign for her legal expenses. Nugent was due to attend a bail hearing on the morning of 15 March but fell ill overnight and did not appear in court.  Nadeen Spence, co-founder of Tambourine Army, said Nugent lost consciousness and experienced five seizures, and that she was denied access to her personal doctor. Jamaicas 2015 Cybercrimes Act is a wide-ranging piece of legislation that covers a range of offenses, including revenge porn and internet trolling.  Annie Paul, a newspaper column writer and commentator from Kingston, described the law as a menace to civil society and democracy. [Putting] these sweeping powers in the hands of a police force that is under scrutiny for numerous instances of extra-judicial killings is a reckless step on the part of the Jamaican government. We need to ensure that the act is reviewed and revised to enhance freedom of speech rather than curb it."
"62""My friend Deborah Lynn Steinberg, who has died aged 55 of breast cancer, was a feminist cultural theorist committed to scholarship and teaching. She made a huge contribution to the Centre for the Study of Women and Gender, the sociology department and the faculty of social sciences at Warwick University. Deborah was born and brought up in Los Angeles, the daughter of Irwin, a radiologist, and his wife, Maxine (nee Beckerman), a lawyer, and attended schools in the city, including University high school. She graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, with a BA in women studies. She then moved to Britain, gaining an MA at the Kent University and her PhD at the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, Birmingham, where we met as doctoral students. Deborahs academic appointments, first at Birkbeck and then at Warwick, were in sociology departments, but she was first and foremost a feminist cultural theorist. She became professor of gender, culture and media studies at Warwick in 2008. Deborah could be combative about academic rigour and social justice  and she could argue her point from an extraordinarily wide and deep knowledge. Some found her intimidating, but she was a brilliant scholar who was also generous to her students and colleagues. She was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2007, but was given the all clear in 2013. However, the disease returned the following year. She was determined to continue working for as long as possible and was supervising doctoral students and chairing the graduate studies committee of the faculty of social sciences until January. Recently, Deborah examined cultural constructions of the cancer patient, writing analytically and personally in a study, The Bad Patient: Estranged Subjects of the Cancer Culture. She also wrote a heartbreaking blog, including both poetry and prose, about her personal journey. Deborahs work was beginning to receive the wider recognition it deserved. Her last book, Genes and the Bioimaginary: Science, Spectacle, Culture (2015), received excellent reviews, including in the Guardian. She is survived by her partner, Gershon Silins, by her parents, Maxine and Irwin, and by her brother, David."
"63""The Japanese golf club at the centre of a sexism row has bowed to pressure from Olympic officials and will overturn restrictions on female membership. The Kasumigaseki country club, north-west of Tokyo, was threatened with the loss of its status as a 2020 Olympics venue if it failed to grant women full membership rights. Under its existing rules, women were prohibited from playing on Sundays. The private club in Saitama prefecture held three briefings for its members before it decided to fully admit women, which required unanimous approval from the board, made up of 15 men.    Related: Tokyo Olympic golf course must give female members equal rights or lose event, says IOC    The president of the Tokyo 2020 organising committee, Yoshiro Mori, praised the club, founded in 1929, for voting to uphold the spirit of the Olympic charter of non-discrimination. Id like to extend my gratitude to the members of the club for their understanding and cooperation, he said in a statement on Monday. Before the decision, critics including the International Olympic Committee argued the clubs exclusionary policies contradicted the Olympic charter, which says every individual has the right to practise sport without discrimination of any kind. The first female governor of Tokyo, Yuriko Koike, has said she felt very uncomfortable that women cannot become full members in this day and age. The change means Olympic organisers will not have to find a different golf venue.  The IOC vice-president, John Coates, welcomed the decision: As we have said all along, gender equality is a fundamental principle of the Olympic Movement and an important part of Olympic Agenda 2020, and we believe this decision now reflects this. Kasumigaseki is not the only golf club to have faced calls to end outdated membership policies. Scotlands Muirfield golf course announced last week that it would admit female members for the first time in its 273-year history. Members endorsed the change after the result of an earlier ballot caused the club to be stripped of the right to host the prestigious Open championship."
"64""A bishop recently promoted to the diocese of Sheffield has announced he will not take up the post following mounting protests over his opposition to female priests and bishops. Philip North, the bishop of Burnley, said in a statement on Thursday that it was clear my leadership would not be acceptable to many. It is the second time that North has decided against taking up an appointment. In 2012, he accepted the post of bishop of Whitby but stepped aside two months later after protests over his opposition to women in the ministry. His decision to stand aside came two weeks after Martyn Percy, the dean of Christ Church, Oxford, publicly called on North to reconsider his promotion to a diocesan bishop, saying his opposition to female priests would cause significant pastoral and public damage to the church.   Related: Opponent of women's ordination appointed as bishop of Sheffield    Percys comments were followed by similar calls from clergy and congregations, not least in Sheffield where a third of Anglican priests are women. North said: It is with regret and sadness that I have decided that I am unable to take up the nomination as bishop of Sheffield. The news of my nomination has elicited a strong reaction within the diocese and some areas of the wider church. It is clear that the level of feeling is such that my arrival would be counter-productive in terms of the mission of the church in South Yorkshire and that my leadership would not be acceptable to many. He went on to apologise to the many for whom this decision will come as a disappointment, adding: There is clearly much to be done on what it means to disagree well and to live with theological difference in the Church of England.  The highly individualised nature of the attacks upon me have been extremely hard to bear. If, as Christians, we cannot relate to each other within the bounds of love, how can we possibly presume to transform a nation in the name of Christ? I hope though that this conversation can continue in the future without it being hung upon the shoulders of one individual. North, a traditionalist Anglo-Catholic, said he had spent the past few weeks on reflection and prayer before coming to his decision. He had assured members of his diocese that he was in favour of women leadership and would actively promote it. However, he is known not to recognise the theological legitimacy of women priests or bishops or male priests who have been ordained by a female bishop. Percy said: I have written to Bishop Philip privately in the light of this very difficult decision. My thoughts are with everyone involved at this testing time. Women and the Church , a group that campaigns within the C of E for gender equality, expressed compassion and concern for all involved in this situation  the diocese of Sheffield, its people and churches, and bishop Philip. It added: We know that the debates over the appointment of a non-ordaining bishop to Sheffield have been deeply painful and divisive for all involved. We have always been clear that this is a theological debate and not personal, yet we know that this is not always how comments are heard. A pressure group, Sheffield Action on Ministry Equality, had been formed to oppose Norths nomination. However, a number of female bishops offered their support, including the bishops of Dorking, Repton, and Newcastle.  This article was amended on 10 March 2017. An earlier version said incorrectly that two-thirds of the Anglican priests in Sheffield are women."
"65""In the latest instalment of the ongoing series, Is this feminist or is it more of the same old nonsense? the actor  and feminist  Emma Watson is being forced to defend going nearly topless for a shoot for Vanity Fair magazine. Feminism is about giving women choice, she said. Feminism is not a stick with which to beat other women with. Its about freedom, its about liberation, its about equality. I really dont know what my tits have to do with it. I like to remember, as the writer Andi Zeisler memorably put it: Not everything a feminist does is a feminist act. So Watson can, and should, do whatever she wants without living in fear of how she will be judged because, goodness knows, women are judged enough.    The March is out now.\" width=\"712\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  The Emma Watson Vanity Fair cover  The March is out now. Photograph: Tim Walker/Vanity Fair    The error here, though, is to describe as feminist a nearly topless shoot for a magazine that often likes its women underdressed. In 1995 the magazine launched its first Hollywood issue, marking the start of an annual tradition, featuring the hottest stars of the year. In what must be one of the most bizarre shoots ever, actors including Nicole Kidman, Uma Thurman and Julianne Moore all appear to have turned up in their nighties or just their underwear. Sandra Bullock has forgotten her shoes. Only Gwyneth Paltrow is dressed.        video\"            data-video-provider=\"Reuters\"            >    Emma Watson: Vanity Fair photo does not undermine feminism    Demi Moore went naked and pregnant in 1991; Caitlin Jenner revealed herself to the world in a skimpy bustier in 2015. Then there was the infamous photograph in which a 15-year-old Miley Cyrus was suggestively shot, apparently clothed in nothing but a sheet. A spokesperson for the Disney Channel, home of the Hannah Montana show in which the Cyrus was a star, said she had been deliberately manipulated. Cyrus said she was so embarrassed. Witness the shoot with fully clothed fashion designer Tom Ford, hanging out with naked Keira Knightley and Scarlett Johansson. Poor Johansson has taken on a blue pallor, possibly the first stages of hypothermia. Imagine a world where, one day, the gender pay gap will be cut and women will finally be able to afford clothes all year round."
"66""  3.59am GMT    Closing summary    As International women Day draws to a close, so does our live coverage. So what next? If youre one of our readers in the US, you can sign up for our freshly launched newsletter tracking the progress of the resistance on feminism and beyond. Or join the Guardian US Facebook community. To keep up with the week in patriarchy, you can sign up for Jessica Valentis email roundup and read Laura Bates on everyday sexism. Globally, track news on women rights and gender equality, and feminism. Knit a pussy hat. Tell us how you marked IWD and what youll be doing next. Speak. Thank you for your comments and contributions.   Related: International Women's Day: women close schools, occupy farms and go on strike         3.27am GMT       A late entrant for most uncomfortable attempt to use IWD for unrelated political point-scoring comes from the US House Ways and Means committee, where representatives are debating the proposed changes to healthcare provisions. Missouris Republican congressman, Jason Smith, is concerned that women are  under Obamacare  paying tax on their visits to tanning salons. Why is nobody talking about this on International women Day, he wanted to know. (Im not sure he genuinely wanted to know, but he did say it.)    GOP rep goes on long riff on how tanning tax hurts women. &quot;Today is International Women&#39;s Day. It&#39;s interesting no one is bringing it up.&quot; pic.twitter.com/FdOGOo18Om&mdash; Dan Diamond (@ddiamond) March 9, 2017    Washington Democrat congresswomen Suzan DelBene thought women might have more pressing concerns when it came to healthcare: birth control, for one.    Tanning beds,@RepJasonSmith? Really? Your biggest concern for women&#39;s health is paying too much for tanning? How about real healthcare? pic.twitter.com/1Di6Kdgl7u&mdash; Rep. Suzan DelBene (@RepDelBene) March 9, 2017         3.12am GMT       Ahead of International women Day, we asked readers to share stories about the battles youve won. You can read them all here, and here is just one example of the responses we received: Brenda Carter, El Cerrito, California In 1969, I was a college student and part of a hippy-communist collective. We put out a monthly newspaper and ran a bookstore in deepest, darkest conservative Orange County. We all worked together, but there were plenty of gender assumptions at play. I refused to learn to make coffee or type so that I couldnt be stuck with those mundane tasks. The women in the group met in a consciousness-raising group. One question we asked ourselves was why it was always the men leading chants and making speeches at rallies and demonstrations. We decided it wasnt that they were unwilling to share, it was that we lacked confidence. So one night, we borrowed a bullhorn [megaphone] and headed down to the beach. We took turns getting a feel for the mechanics, and then we began using the bullhorn to amplify our voices, most of us for the first time ever. The noise of the waves gave us the perfect cover to experiment and let loose. I remember the freedom of standing out on the sand under the dark sky, finding my loudest voice, and letting it fly. I had never been in a situation before where I felt so free to fail and so free to succeed, and that night made me a different kind of women. After that, the bullhorn was ours. A small battle, perhaps, but one that has come to mind in recent months as Ive watched so many women speaking from bullhorns and microphones. Who even thinks to notice it now? On such small battles, larger ones are won, and new worlds open up.   Related: Fighting for equality and against catcalling  the battles women have won         2.57am GMT       The Empire State building has been lit up in pink to mark the close of IWD on the US east coast. (The women march has done a pretty solid job of reclaiming pink as a protest colour.)   s Day in Manhattan, New York, U.S., March 8, 2017. REUTERS/Mike Segar\" width=\"1000\" height=\"667\" class=\"gu-image\" />        2.40am GMT       To mark International women Day in Brazil, football team Cruzeiro tonight wore specially commissioned squad numbers with messages to highlight daily challenges faced by women in the South American country. Cruizero won their Brazilian Cup match against Murici-AL 2-0. The shirts featured a different message for each number such as a rape every 11 minutes or salaries 30% lower, organised in conjunction with the NGO AzMina, which fights for female empowerment in Brazil. Announcing the initiative on their website on Wednesday, the Belo Horizonte-based clubs president Gilvan de Pinho Tavares said:  In the 21st century, it is not tolerable to see women suffer acts of violence and discrimination. With this action, we join all who combat inequalities against people of the feminine sex. This is one of the social roles that big fan clubs must always be developing. International women Day is not just a moment to bring to the surface all the characteristics of inequality that still exist in Brazil and the world, but it is also a moment of awareness of other aspects related to women. Its important to have a moment of this, where you can bring up such important and women-related issues.    Related: A rape every 11 minutes: Cruzeiro to wear shirts to mark International women Day         2.08am GMT       Its getting loud in Los Angeles:    NOW: LA JOINS THE GLOBALLY COORDINATED NOISE DEMO!! #womentrikeus #womenstrike pic.twitter.com/nC2y14gYLx&mdash; AF3IRM (@AF3IRM) March 9, 2017         1.54am GMT       Reuters has spoken to some of the women who took part in protests in the US today:   Debra Sands, a middle-school teacher, joined thousands of women at New York Citys Central Park after her students convinced her to attend. This past years election made me realize that voting in November isnt enough, Sands said. In San Francisco, where about 1,500 people gathered, Christine Bussenius said she and her female colleagues at Grey Advertising convinced their all-male managers to give them the day off and participate in the rally. We were nervous, she admitted. But the men stepped up to fill in the void. Rallies were held in numerous cities, including Washington, where demonstrators gathered at the US labor department. Female staffers at Fusion Media Groups Gizmodo declared they were striking for the day. At least three US school districts, in Virginia, Maryland and North Carolina, closed because of staff shortages after teachers requested the day off. Nearly 1,000 women converged outside Los Angeles City Hall, many of them critical of the Republican-backed healthcare bill that would strip women health and abortion provider Planned Parenthood of funding. Its terrifying. Its anti-women, said Kassia Krozsur, a finance professional. About 200 gathered in Atlanta, where signs read We are sisters and Stop Trump. If we want to change what is going on, we need to turn anger into action. People need to run for local office, organizer Rebekah Joy said.        1.31am GMT    Images of IWD around the world    Pakistan   s Day in Islamabad.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"675\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Pakistani women take part in a demonstration to mark International women Day in Islamabad. Photograph: Anjum Naveed/AP    Macedonia     A rally in Skopje, Macedonia. Photograph: Pierre Crom/Getty Images    Yemen   a.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"667\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Yemeni women at a rally marking IWD outside the UN offices in Sanaa. Photograph: Yahya Arhab/EPA    Lebanon   We demand our rights to build Lebanon together.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"645\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Women outside the government palace in Beirut hold a banner reading in Arabic: We demand our rights to build Lebanon together. Photograph: Nabil Mounzer/EPA    Egypt     An artist performs during a demonstration against sexual harassment in Cairo. Photograph: Xinhua / Barcroft Images      Updated at 1.35am GMT     1.14am GMT       In the US, Time reports that several women march organisers who were arrested earlier on Wednesday in New York have now been released. Organisers Tamika Mallory, Linda Sarsour, Carmen Perez and Bob Bland were among a number of protesters detained close to the Trump Hotel at Columbus Circle. Most  including Mallory, Sarsour and Perez  were freed on Wednesday evening, Time reported, but others remain in custody:   Yet to be released by 8pm on Wednesday was Sophie Ellman-Golan, a 24-year old activist whose mother Rabbi Barat Ellman was arrested about three weeks ago for protesting the Trumps travel ban. Im incredible proud of her, said Ellman as she waited outside the precinct for her daughter to be released. For a long time shes been a women who puts her feet where her mouth is.     Updated at 1.14am GMT     1.04am GMT    IWD in Nigeria        The ONE campaign, an international organization aimed at ending extreme poverty and eradicating preventable diseases, staged several hundred walk-ins around the globe earlier today to rally for women education. One of its largest events took place in Nigeria, in Ekiti State, with several hundred students and activists. In the western part of the country, dozens holding signs to protest the worldwide gender disparity in education marched and blocked traffic on a 5km march starting at the University of Ibadan.        12.52am GMT    The Obamas mark IWD      On International women Day, @MichelleObama and I are inspired by all of you who embrace your power to drive change. Barack Obama (@BarackObama) March 8, 2017         Celebrating the beauty and diversity of our country on this #InternationalwomenDay with some of the many fierce and promising girls here at DC&#39;s Cardozo Education Campus. I loved visiting this school because it tells the American story in so many ways. Three years ago, Cardozo established its International Academy with only 150 students, but today it boasts nearly 400 who are thriving in and out of the classroom. By embracing young immigrants and their diverse cultures and contributions, Cardozo is a model for our entire country. The girls I met with today are ready to take on the world.  Weve just got to make sure that the world is ready for them. A post shared by Michelle Obama (@michelleobama) on Mar 8, 2017 at 1:03pm PST         12.33am GMT       Feminists across the Americas have been holding a day-long live marathon of radio programming  due to come to an end at 10pm Argentina time, in around half an hour from now. The #MaratonaRadialFeminista has featured women and their stories from Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Canada, Nicaragua, Mexico and Uruguay  with European solidarity from Spain and Switzerland  on Red Nosotras Radio. Organisers say:  The sorority and joy of being together, without losing our anger, will once again break the frontiers.     @Claire_Phipps Latin American feminists from 40 countries+ broadcast online radio marathon since 3am...still going! #MaratonaRadialFeminista pic.twitter.com/sZezR9j8av&mdash; Nunca en Domingo (@_nuncaendomingo) March 8, 2017         12.11am GMT       Frances president, Franois Hollande, has lambasted what he called a decline in women rights in the United States and Russia. AFP reports:  Speaking on International women Day, the French leader said that threats of backtracking on women rights dont just come from emerging nations or countries under dictatorships, but also in developed and rich countries. What about positions or intentions expressed by the new US administration? he asked. They would reduce funding for family planning, as if this is the first cut to be made to allow an increase in military spending, he added. Hollande also took aim at Moscows policies, pointing out that a law that penalised violence against family members had recently been modified. Why would anyone change this text except to once again attack the freedom of women? he said. Hollande, who is coming to the end of his tenure and not standing for re-election, added that in Poland there had recently been protests against attempts to impose a near total ban on abortions. Such moves to row back on women rights stem from religious fundamentalism and the resurgence of reactionary ideologies which intend to reassign women to the procreative role in the domestic sphere, he said.        11.57pm GMT    IWD in Argentina    Women have been marching in Buenos Aires, Argentina; reader Ella Jessel, who is there, has shared this video and images with me. (You can send your own contributions, from wherever you are marking IWD, to me on Twitter @Claire_Phipps.)    @Claire_Phipps Plaza de Mayo Buenos Aires . See TL for more pics from here. pic.twitter.com/oY1YWAn1hK&mdash; Ella Jessel (@EllaJessel) March 8, 2017      Great bit of zebra crossing DIY spelling out &#39;VIVAS NOS QUEREMOS&#39; (we want to live)#8M #IWD2017 pic.twitter.com/Blv3ZgIYbR&mdash; Ella Jessel (@EllaJessel) March 8, 2017    Last October, tens of thousands of women marched in Buenos Aires to push back against violence against women. The hashtag #NiUnaMenos (Not one less, meaning not one more women lost to male violence) has become a powerful rallying cry for women in Argentina and other South American countries.    #NiUnaMenos #InternationalwomenDay pic.twitter.com/MSkPnBNW3u&mdash; Ella Jessel (@EllaJessel) March 8, 2017         11.39pm GMT    IWD in Turkey    Tens of thousands of women took to the streets across Turkey earlier on Wednesday, AFP reports:  In Istanbul over 10,000 people, mostly women, walked the long Istiklal Avenue, chanting end male-perpetrated violence and Tayyip, Tayyip, run, run, we are coming. Tayyip refers to the Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who is seeking to create an executive presidency that would see the post of prime minister abolished. On 16 April, the Turkish public will vote on whether to change the current system, which the government argues causes instability  while critics claim greater powers for Erdogan will lead to one-man rule. A deep purple dominated the colourful crowds in Istanbul who held placards saying women are free and we are strong united. The march was organised by multiple women rights groups and attendees included LGBT individuals, young women, students and also men  many of whom were carrying No posters. For Nurten Karanci who attended the march, being a women in Turkey means a fight to live, to survive. Last year, a women was attacked in Istanbul for wearing shorts on a public bus while another women wearing a headscarf said she was kicked and insulted last month. women activists often call for an end to violence against women in a country where hundreds of women are killed every year, often by their husbands. Despite a heavy police presence and water cannon trucks on standby, the Istanbul march took place peacefully as they walked from Taksim Square to Sishane on the other end of the avenue on the European side of Istanbul. Members of the pro-Kurdish Peoples Democratic Party (HDP), whose two co-leaders remain under arrest accused of terror links, also took part of the march in Istanbul.      Marchers in central Istanbul. Photograph: Emrah Gurel/AP     Meanwhile in Ankara women hit tambourines and held No posters shouting their opposition to giving one man all the power. In the Kurdish-majority southeastern city of Diyarbakir, hundreds of people staged a demonstration for women rights, dancing and playing music. One participant, Sabiba Akgul, said all women should stand up and support each other. Hand in hand, they will find freedom. Activist Ozlem Gul in Istanbul described the difficulty of being a women in Turkey:   Being a women anyhow is very complicated, especially today. We have to fight against many things. We have to fight against the attacks on our bodies, our work, our opinions. We are in the streets, we wont let up, and we will keep on the fight as Turkish women.        11.25pm GMT       In Australia, the feminist and author Germaine Greer has said that aiming for equality is a profoundly conservative goal for women, speaking at the launch of her archive at the University of Melbourne on Wednesday night. Greer told an audience of about 500 people at the Kathleen Fitzpatrick Theatre for the International women Day event:  What everybody has accepted is the idea of equality feminism. It will change nothing. War is made against civilian populations where women and children are the principal casualties in places like Syria, whether in collapsing buildings or bombed schools. War is now completely made by the rich with their extraordinary killing machines, killing the poor who have no comeback. Women are drawing level with men in this profoundly destructive world that we live in and, as far as Im concerned, its the wrong way. Were getting nowhere. If were going to change things I think were going to have to start creating a women polity that is strong, that has its own way of operating, that makes contact with women in places like Syria, and that challenges the right of destructive nations.  Women needed to aim higher and achieve more than simply drawing level with men and entering into traditionally male-dominated fields, Greer said:  If what happens when women discover when they join the army is they discover its no place for a sane human being then theyve learned something. But right now, things are looking distinctly grim.    Related: Equality is a 'profoundly conservative goal' for women, Germaine Greer says         11.09pm GMT       In Brazil, a message from President Michel Temer to mark IWD has been met with some incredulity, as he praised women for their home-making skills and ability to spot a supermarket bargain:    Brazils president honored women by complimenting their homemaking, child-raising &amp; home economics. Im embarrassed to be the same gender. Andrew Fishman (@AndrewDFish) March 8, 2017      On Intl women Day Brazils President Temer says Nobody is better than women at spotting price abnormalities in the supermarket. Really. Andrew Fishman (@AndrewDFish) March 8, 2017    Temer does not have great form: on taking over as president last year, he installed a new cabinet with zero women in it. Women marching in Brazilian cities today expressed anger towards Temer, as my colleague Jonathan Watts reports:  Rio de Janeiro, So Paulo, Brasilia and Porto Alegre each saw hundreds of demonstrators mark International women Day with banners and chants of Fora Temer! (Michel Temer Out!), a reference to the current president who came to power by plotting the impeachment of Brazils first women president  and his former running mate  Dilma Rousseff.  The conservative president did little to mollify their anger with a speech in which he lauded how much women do around the house and the important role they play in assessing supermarket prices. He also noted that more an economic recovery will enable more women to enter the workplace in addition to their domestic chores. On taking power last year, Temer abolished the ministry of women, racial equality and human rights, and cut programs on gender equality. His 28-member cabinet now includes only two women. Critics say his pension reform plans will hit women harder than men.     Updated at 11.19pm GMT     10.57pm GMT       Hi, this is Claire Phipps picking up the live blog, with thanks to Molly. Ill continue to cover IWD events live as they happen, everywhere in the globe its still 8 March. Do send me your contributions from wherever you are, on Twitter @Claire_Phipps or in the comments below. Heres a female role model if ever we saw (or read) one: Matilda sees something she likes in Wall Sts Fearless Girl:    Now that&#39;s a pose! #MatildainOZ #BeBoldForChange #MatildainNZ #MatildaTheMusical pic.twitter.com/9XSrthhSy9&mdash; matildamusicalaunz (@MatildainOz) March 8, 2017         10.30pm GMT    The Fearless Girl    The Fearless Girl statue appeared overnight just down the road from Wall Street, defiantly staring down the famous bronze bull. The statue of a young girl, hands on hips, was instantly providing a good PR story for investment company State Street Global Advisors, who installed the statue for International women Day and called on companies to put more women on their boards. But it also provided a nice background for New York journalists in search of an International women Day story.    The Fearless Girl statue is a frenzy of tourists and journos trying to interview other journos #InternationalwomenDay pic.twitter.com/JKsDPdVb94&mdash; Amber Jamieson (@ambiej) March 8, 2017    The Guardian was asked by two separate news organizations for interviews when it popped down to visit, with Buzzfeed livestreaming the statue on its site. Thanks to the bull, that corner of Broadway is always pumping with tourists, but Fearless Girl made the crowds even worse than normal.    Fearless Girl statue is somewhere in the middle of this pic.twitter.com/vty9tZYJMs&mdash; Amber Jamieson (@ambiej) March 8, 2017    Even if it was just a clever marketing stunt, these girls didnt care.    Was cynical re Fearless Girl statue  until I saw these two little cuties excitedly posing for a pic pic.twitter.com/BgXXyv1A5v&mdash; Amber Jamieson (@ambiej) March 8, 2017      Updated at 10.37pm GMT     10.10pm GMT    More scenes from IWD in the Americas        At least 100 people marched in downtown Washington, DC to demand equal pay and protections for women workers.      Activists marched to celebrate International women Day and protest violence against women in San Salvador.     AFP PHOTO / VANDERLEI ALMEIDAVANDERLEI ALMEIDA/AFP/Getty Images Photograph: Vanderlei Almeida/AFP/Getty Images    Hundreds took part in an International women Day rally at Candelaria square in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Guardian correspondent Jon Watts reports:  At a demonstration in central Rio de Janeiro, several hundred women protested against sexual violence, unequal wages and the current government of President Michel Temer, who ousted his female running mate Dilma Rousseff last year. Temer is a coup monger and a misogynist, said student Kharine Dantes. He wants to repeal quotas for women parliamentarians and to outlaw the morning-after pill. Outside the City council building in Rio de Janeiro, Workers Party activists handed out black balloons each marked with a different statistic about violence against women in Brazil: a rape every two hours, three-fifths of young women suffering violence from their partners and 40% of police women tend victims of sexual harassment. This is a day of struggle as well as celebration, said Micaela Costa. The problem of violence and harassment is terrible but at least it is becoming more visible.        9.31pm GMT       Dozens of women gathered in Lafayette Square in front of the White House to protest a US policy that bans international NGOs from providing abortion services or offering information about abortions if they receive US funding.    We&#39;re still here!! We&#39;re protesting bc women&#39;s rights aren&#39;t up for debate. #TrumpGlobalGag #NoAbortionBan pic.twitter.com/bhl6wn18dG&mdash; CHANGE (@genderhealth) March 8, 2017    President Trump imposed what critics call the global gag rule in an executive order he signed just after taking office. The policy has put thousands of international healthcare workers in a difficult position; they must decide whether to continue to offer family planning care that includes abortion or to preserve a critical funding stream. The US is the single largest donor to global health efforts. But many international health advocates insist that their efforts are not comprehensive without abortion services. Worldwide, unsafe abortions are a major cause of maternal mortality and kill tens of thousands of women every year.    Hey hey, ho ho, #TrumpGlobalGag has got to go. #NoAbortionBan pic.twitter.com/9QoxEGXwPh&mdash; CHANGE (@genderhealth) March 8, 2017         8.59pm GMT       Oops.    This was retweetedand then deletedby Hillary Clinton. pic.twitter.com/WaTvAMP4IC&mdash; Kyle Griffin (@kylegriffin1) March 8, 2017         8.48pm GMT    Falling short of feminist goals in Canada     s day in Ottawa, Wednesday March 8, 2017. (Adrian Wyld/The Canadian Press via AP)\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Justin TrudeauCanadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau speaks during an event on International women day in Ottawa, Wednesday March 8, 2017. (Adrian Wyld/The Canadian Press via AP) Photograph: Adrian Wyld/AP    Despite being a self-declared feminist with a gender balanced cabinet, Justin Trudeau and his Liberal government have fallen short when it comes to translating rhetoric into real change for the countrys women, according to a new feminist scorecard from Oxfam Canada. Many in the country were hopeful when the prime minister publicly proclaimed himself a feminist after being elected in 2015, said Lauren Ravon of Oxfam. Many hoped the result would be a government committed to tackling some of the deep-rooted issues facing Canadians. As many as 4,000 indigenous women have gone missing or been murdered in Canada in the past three decades. Child care costs in the country rank among the highest in the OECD, while a persistent pay gap between men and women have sent the country tumbling from 19th to 35th place in recent years in the the World Economic Forums global gender gap rankings.  The feminist scorecard offers a means to hold the prime minister to account by tracking annual progress on these issues and others. We knew from experience that its one thing to say something but words dont get you very far in the end, you still need to follow it up with concrete action, said Ravon. Theres a lot of people looking to Canada, so we want to say, what is the distance between the rhetoric and actual policy-making on the ground? The first scorecard, released this week, noted that the government has yet to back its bold feminist rhetoric with concrete policy and spending decisions. The government has so-far demonstrated solid progress in just one area: women representation and leadership. You cant overstate the importance of the first gender balanced cabinet in Canadian history, said Ravon. The government fared worst in the category of jobs, where Oxfam noted that no tangible steps have been taken to address the gender wage gap or ensure living wages for the working poor, the majority of whom are women.  Still, the organisation was hopeful that the government would steadily improve its performance on the scorecard in the coming years. For the most part weve seen good first signs. Things are moving in the right direction, said Ravon. As the Liberal government embarks on the second year of its mandate, it is time to turn feminist words into action. Meanwhile, First Lady Sophie Gregoire Trudeau caused titters when she called on Canadians to celebrate International women Day by celebrating the boys and men in our lives who encourage us to be who we truly are, who treat girls &amp; women with respect, and who arent afraid to speak up in front of others.       Are you ready to ignite change? This week, as we mark International women Day, lets celebrate the boys and men in our lives who encourage us to be who we truly are, who treat girls &amp; women with respect, and who arent afraid to speak up in front of others. Take a picture holding hands with your male ally &amp; share it on social media using the hashtag #TomorrowInHand. Together, we can create a movement that inspires more men to join the fight to build a better tomorrow with equal rights &amp; opportunities for everyone because #EqualityMatters.  tes-vous prtes  faire des tincelles pour allumer un changement ? Cette semaine,  loccasion de la Journe internationale des femmes, clbrons les garons et les hommes qui nous encouragent  tre qui nous sommes vraiment, qui traitent les filles et les femmes avec respect et qui nont pas peur de parler haut devant les autres. Prenez une photo main dans la main avec votre alli et diffusez-la dans les mdias sociaux avec le mot-clic #DemainEnMains. Ensemble, nous pouvons susciter un mouvement qui incitera davantage dhommes  lutter avec nous pour des lendemains meilleurs, lgalit des droits et des chances pour tous  parce que l#galitcompte. A post shared by Sophie Grgoire Trudeau (@sophiegregoiretrudeau) on Mar 7, 2017 at 7:20am PST         8.35pm GMT       Many US female journalists are in a tricky spot today: should they go on strike in solidarity or work to cover women focused stories that otherwise would be ignored? Different media outlets, particularly women-focused ones, are trying out different methods. Bustle is on strike. MTV adjusted its logo to make it a W for women. Glamour colored its logo red in solidarity with the women strike, and all its coverage is focused on International women Day and the strike. New York Magazines The Cut is on strike, to show solidarity with the women around the world who are standing up for equal pay and equal opportunity, reproductive freedom, an end to sexual assaults, an end to bigotry of all kinds, and policies that support our families like parental leave, health care, and child care. Teen Vogue is also striking:  Although as an editorial staff we are privileged to have this platform and audience (as well as the opportunity to take a day off of work), journalism is still an industry that disproportionately awards leadership and power to men, and as a result, we still struggle to be taken seriously when we talk about politics.  Jezebel is letting male colleagues take over the site for the day, and its proving to be the most fascinating media experiment of the day. As editor-in-chief Emma Carmichael wrote:  Publishing for a majority women audience is quite different from publishing for Deadspin or Gizmodo, and we want them to be thoughtful about how they package news and write criticism for Jezebel on a politically meaningful day for many women around the world. Were asking them to take that responsibility on without much of our guidance and advice, and if they stumble in that pursuit, we hope you notice. A few of our brave volunteers have confessed to being a bit nervous about this experiment, and we agree that they should be. If the site feels different or off or even just bad tomorrow, that is very much the point.  Its beeninteresting. The first post of the day was a somewhat self-congratulatory entry by Jim Cooke about feminists using an illustration he created. Another post is titled So Now Theres a Girl on Wall Street. Hamilton Nolan wrote about the left-wing woke men who describe themselves as allies while actually being insufferable creeps. Here at The Guardian, our female staffers are working, but Ive got my own personal strike motto    My personal plan for the #womenstrike tomorrow is to only interview women and tell stories about women. Let&#39;s see how it goes.&mdash; Amber Jamieson (@ambiej) March 7, 2017      This will also include not answering emails, phone calls or tweets from men. Can&#39;t wait! #daywithoutawomen #InternationalwomenDay&mdash; Amber Jamieson (@ambiej) March 7, 2017    So far so good!    Updated at 8.48pm GMT     8.34pm GMT    IWD in Mexico City     s Day demonstration take place at the Monument to the Revolution in Mexico City, Mexico. EPA/MARIO GUZMAN\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  An International women Day demonstration take place at the Monument to the Revolution in Mexico City, Mexico. EPA/MARIO GUZMAN Photograph: Mario Guzman/EPA    More than a 100 women arrived today in Mexico Citys Historic Center, known as Zocalo, to celebrate International women Day.  By mid-day, a fair organized by the women Institute of Mexico City had garnered almost 80 civil organizations and government initiatives to promote awareness on safety. Since 2015, Mexico City is part of the global initiative for the provision of safe cities and public spaces for women, InMujeres General Director Teresa Inchaustegui told The Guardian. This is a topic very important for females particularly young ones who suffer the most. Inchaustegui said the local government is supporting women who will join the international labor strike and march scheduled to take place at 4pm next to the Angel of Independence in Reforma. Several groups of activists including Ni una menos movement, female members of the Workers Union and the Citizen Assembly for the Rights of Women are expected to join the demands against gender violence and inequality. We will strike because we are fed up of violence, Areli Castillo said. One of the founders of the Citizen Assembly, Castillo criticized the governments festival partly because they see it as a party, to congratulate women but dont need compliments, we need recognition. Melissa Cuevas, 31, is preparing to attend the march this afternoon as she sees it as a way to increase awareness among the population. Cuevas attributes gender inequality to a strong patriarchal approach in the society which consider that women are inferior, and based on this belief different problems arise, but the belief behind it is the main cause of it. In most parts of Mexico City, the day continues under the notion business as usual.  Female entrepreneur Maria del Mar Gargari said I wont participate because I have a small business and cannot leave it unattended. According to statistics from the National Citizen Observatory of Femicides, seven Mexican women are killed everyday because of gender-based violence.     Updated at 8.36pm GMT     8.29pm GMT        re closely watching how they handle women issues Wednesday, March 8, 2017, in Salt Lake City. (AP Photo/Rick Bowmer)\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  AP Photo/Rick Bowmer Photograph: Rick Bowmer/AP    Several hundred protesters have descended on the Utah state capitol for A Day Without a women protest. The AP reports:  Hundreds of women dressed in red and holding signs with photos of their local lawmakers are gathering at the Utah state capitol for a Day Without a women protest to remind legislators theyre closely watching how they handle women issues. Crowds of women stood outside both the states House and Senate on Wednesday to send notes to lawmakers asking them to come out to talk with them. Salt Lake City resident Chelsi Archibald says she skipped work at her marketing job to attend the event and send a note to Republican Sen. Todd Weiler, urging his support of the Equal Rights Amendment.        8.24pm GMT       International women Day protests are still happening sporadically across the US. In New York, at least 10 organizers were arrested by the NYPD, said a spokeswomen for the event.    Some of us have been arrested #DayWithoutAwomen pic.twitter.com/WSYVdrQjxA&mdash; Women&#39;s March (@womenmarch) March 8, 2017    In Washington, DC, dozens of protesters marched on the Department of Labor demanding equal pay.    Protesters are marching on @USDOL #Labor Dept. HQ on #DayWithoutWomen day of demonstrations in #DC @Fox5DC #5at630 pic.twitter.com/h6kRoUnMHP&mdash; Tom Fitzgerald (@FitzFox5DC) March 8, 2017    And on TV, the revolution was color-coordinated.    The resistance is on the news and it&#39;s color coordinated. I see you @SenWarren @SRuhle @greta @donnabrazile @jmpalmieri! #DayWithoutAwomen pic.twitter.com/LVP6p4ebbm&mdash; Helen Brosnan (@HelenBrosnan) March 8, 2017         8.01pm GMT    Snapchat celebrates IWD with a light-skinned Frida Kahlo, a sexy Marie Curie     s Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird (1940), on the right is the same self-portrait run through Snapchats filter. Composite: Alamy &amp; Snapchat\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  On the left is Frida Kahlos Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird (1940), on the right is the same self-portrait run through Snapchats filter. Composite: Alamy &amp; Snapchat Composite: Alamy &amp; Snapchat     Related: Snapchat raises eyebrows with Women's Day filter that lightens Frida Kahlo's skin     Snapchat is celebrating Mexican artist Frida Kahlo on International women Day with a filter that lightens the skin of users. Snapchat debuted three custom filters for the day, which is being marked in the United States with protests and strikes. The filters allows users to take self-portraits as Kahlo, civil rights activist Rosa Parks, or scientist Marie Curie. But on a day to celebrate international feminism, Snapchats filters have raised some eyebrows. The Frida Kahlo filter lightens a users skin and eyes and applies bright red lipstick, a floral headdress and braids, and the artists signature unibrow. The skin color change is particularly noticeable on faces with darker skin  as becomes apparent when Kahlos own self-portrait is put through the filter. Kahlo, who was of mixed indigenous and European heritage, painted herself with brown skin and dark eyes. Much of her work engaged with indigenous themes and imagery. The filter for Nobel Prize-winning physicist and chemist applies smoky eye makeup and lengthens the eye lashes. Curie is best known for her groundbreaking research on radioactivity. She was awarded the Nobel Prize twice, once for chemistry and once for physics.        7.52pm GMT    The wage gap in the US    For International women Day, the Economic Policy Institute, a progressive think tank, is sharing some facts about the persistent wage gap in the United States. A lot of EPIs output has focused on which factors do not explain the wage gap. It turns out a that lot factors people assume drive the wage gap actually play a small role. For instance, women choices of careers alone cant explain their pay disparity. And women cant simply educate themselves out of the pay gap. Women who hold advanced degrees still earn less, on average, than men with only a bachelors degree. Then, theres the one-two punch of gender and racial bias. In the US, the wage gap is much bigger if youre a women of color.    Median black women take home $7.63 less per hour than median white men . #ADayWithoutAwomen pic.twitter.com/SMh4Nddk5f&mdash; Economic Policy Inst (@EconomicPolicy) March 7, 2017    In fact, while the overall wage gap has narrowed over the past four decades, the disparity between white women wages and black women is one of the fastest-growing gaps in the economy. That gap has increased the most for college-educated black women who are just entering the market.  Latina women are even further behind when their wages are compared alongside white workers. For every dollar a white man is paid, white women are paid 81 cents, black women 65 cents, and Hispanic women 58 cents.    Median Hispanic women take home $8.90 less per hour than media white men. #ADayWithoutAwomen pic.twitter.com/YvsSVrSkb7&mdash; Economic Policy Inst (@EconomicPolicy) March 7, 2017    Women have made forward progress in gaining managerial roles, but those gains have almost all gone to white women. Meanwhile, the minimum wage workers who have seen their wages freeze are more likely to be women of color. Women are nearly two-thirds of the minimum wage workforce, and the majority of women earning minimum wage or less are women of color.       7.38pm GMT    IWD in Brazil    Hundreds of women farmers across Brazil occupied government offices in protest of new policies they say disproportionately harm poor, rural women.  In one instance of protest, women from Brazils Landless Workers Movement staged an occupation of an abandoned farm belonging to a prominent businessman jailed on charges of corruption.     Courtesy of Ani Hao Photograph: Handout    The land, said Ani Hao, a national organizer, belongs to Eike Batista, an oil and gas magnate who was arrested in the course of a multimillion dollar money laundering investigation. One hundred families will camp and farm on its 3,000 hectares, said Hao.  Their occupation came as hundreds protesters marched across Brazilian cities or took over public offices. The demonstrators said pension reforms and other changes to social security will make it harder for family farmers to stay on the land. from Reuters:  Brazilian officials say the changes, including raising the minimum retirement age for rural workers to 65 years and higher pension contributions, are crucial for South Americas largest country to escape a fiscal crisis and recession.  Rural workers live on the margins, said Sejane Alexandre, a protester in Tocantins State in central Brazils agricultural belt.  The rural worker does not have the same longevity and access to healthcare (as urban employees), she said, according to local media.  In Recife, on Brazils northeastern coast, around 1,000 female land rights activists occupied the governments social security office, the Pastoral Land Commission campaign group said in a statement.  About seventy percent of the food consumed by Brazilians is produced by family farmers, according to the United Nations, but small producers often complain about unequal land distribution and poor government services in rural areas.        6.57pm GMT       First Lady Melania Trump celebrated International women Day with salsify and spinach gnocchi at a private luncheon at the White House.     Menu at First Lady&#39;s WH luncheon marking Intl Women&#39;s Day.. (TV Pool photo by @betsy_klein) pic.twitter.com/QYMsuq9l43&mdash; Mark Knoller (@markknoller) March 8, 2017    Guests included Trump aide Kellyanne Conway, Ivanka Trump, Karen Pence, Education Secretary Betsy DeVos, Sen. Susan Collins, Small Business Administration chair-slash-former WWE executive Linda McMahon, and a 2015 Viognier from Sonoma County.        6.47pm GMT        Related: Why not all women can strike on International Women's Day    Mona Chalabi writes for the Guardian that not all women can strike today  some, because they lack the power, and some, because the work cant happen without them:  International women Day has always been tied to labor rights (first by the Socialist Party of America in 1908, and later by female textile workers in Russia in 1917). But that hasnt meant that every women in the workforce has been able to take part. Then and now, women have worked in jobs where striking just isnt an option. There are various reasons for that. In the US, women are more likely than men to work in part-time employment where workers are often considered more disposable. They are also less likely than men to receive a pension, more likely than men to live in poverty and more likely to be paid hourly rates that are belowminimum wage. That makes striking risky, and this is before you even get to the astounding amount of unpaid work women do, including caregiver roles where taking a day off can be a matter of life and death. There are other occupations where women make up the majority. Pre-schoolers in America will have a tough time learning today if their teachers, 98% of whom are female, do decide to go on strike. More important though is healthcare  what would hospitals around the country look like if the 91% of nurses who are female simply didnt show up?  Read on for a list of professions in which women dominate and for a look at the gender balance at the Guardian.       6.38pm GMT    Protests in Poland      Major demonstration in Warsaw&#39;s Constitution Square.#IWD2017 pic.twitter.com/HLeD4FbCcU&mdash; Christian Davies (@crsdavies) March 8, 2017    Women across Poland held demonstrations and marches on Wednesday to demand equal rights and protest violence. In Warsaw, hundred gathered before the office of Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the head of Polands conservative party and a supporter of the governments recent efforts to ban abortion.            6.27pm GMT       A group of US Democratic congresswomen spoke before a crowd of dozens dressed in red on the steps of the US Capitol. The rally was part of a symbolic walkout some Democrats in the House staged for #DayWithoutAwomen  a protest the speakers linked directly to Trump and the GOP.       We are resisting Trump and congressional Republicans and letting them know we will not go back, said Rep. Barbara Lee of California. We walked out today for A Day Without a women to send a clear message: that we stand with our sisters across the country who have walked out in defense of equal rights for womenWe are raising our voices for the millions of women who cant. Amid signs reading women Rights are Human Rights, Lee hailed women of color who work twice as hard for half the pay. Her colleagues denounced the high rates of violence facing trans women, and the renewed threat of deportation facing many immigrants. Rep. Brenda Lawrence of Michigan read out a list of statistics that would reflect a day without women. A day without a women is a day of great loss for America and for the world, she said. A day without a women is a day without the primary or sole earner for 40% of households with young children. A day without a women is a day without 47% of the nations workforce. A day without a women is a day without 80% of the health care workforce in America and close to 80% of the elementary and middle school educators in this country. You would think our numbers would be enough to convince people of the needs for equality for women in America, she concluded. But we still have a long way to go.       Happy #InternationalwomenDay! #DayWithoutAwomen  A post shared by Corinne Falotico (@corinne_fal) on Mar 8, 2017 at 9:29am PST         6.12pm GMT    White House statement on IWD    The White House office of the Press Secretary released the following statement to mark International women Day.  International women Day gives us the opportunity to celebrate and reflect upon the meaningful progress women have made throughout society, while also acknowledging that there is still much work that remains to be done to ensure the complete and consequential participation of women in all spheres of economic, political, and public life. Throughout our history, women have made enormous contributions in the service of our country, and we know that as a Nation, America will only become stronger, more prosperous, and better able to meet our shared goals, as women achieve greater access to a level playing field. The United States, as a beacon of hope and a leader in promoting women rights, is deeply committed to empowering women both at home and abroad. Our policies will work to advance the economic empowerment of women by promoting entrepreneurship and equal access to education, employment opportunities, and training adapted to a new economic landscape. Together, America looks forward to a bright future with women in higher-wage jobs throughout high-growth sectors. America remains committed to empowering women around the world to realize their full potential within the global marketplace. And with our international partners, America will build upon the legacy of previous generations of women who have bravely broken through both economic and political barriers. It was with these goals in mind that, as one of its first initiatives, this Administration ramped up efforts to promote women in business by launching the United States-Canada Council for Advancement of Women Entrepreneurs and Business Leaders. The United States will continue to work with Canada and other partners around the globe to ensure that all women have the opportunity to succeed. Today, the United States renews its commitment to fostering economic growth and job creation by harnessing the full potential of women in our economy. This Administration will work diligently to encourage women to enter and succeed in the workforce while addressing the many barriers women still face in achieving economic success, including those that impede women access to capital, markets, and networking opportunities.  Just as the statement went live, dozens of House Democrats stood on the steps of the US Capitol to argue the threat the Trump administration posed to women reproductive rights, women of color, Muslim women, trans women, minimum wage-earners, and women immigrants.       6.04pm GMT       Heres an aerial shot of the protest in New York:       A sea of women in red right outside of work! #internationalwomenday #daywithoutawomen A post shared by Melanie Bowen (@mabcat) on Mar 8, 2017 at 9:30am PST         6.02pm GMT       Hundreds have started to gather at the southeast corner of Central Park in New York City as part of the US strike for women rights.     &quot;A #DayWithoutAwomen is a day without me!&quot; NYC: Meet us at 59th &amp; 5th! pic.twitter.com/j9xET6112c&mdash; Women&#39;s March (@womenmarch) March 8, 2017    The rally, for women economic equality and freedom from violence will culminate in a march, all taking place in the immediate vicinity of Trump Tower.  Organizers of International women Day called for a general strike of US women to represent the women who have been left behind, such as women of color, Muslim women, trans women, and working-class women. Especially surrounding Hillary Clintons candidacy, theres been this idea that feminism is somehow about women becoming powerful and successful CEOs, aid Tithi Bhattacharya, an associate professor at Purdue University and one of the people who first called for the strike in a February op-ed for the Guardian. The goal of 8 March is to make feminism a threat to the system and to talk about the feminism about the 99% rather than the 1%.            5.29pm GMT    US House Dems walkout on International Women's Day    Watch a livestream of US House Democrats staging a walkout to mark International women Day.         Updated at 5.42pm GMT     5.20pm GMT       Chirlane McCray, the first lady of New York City, marks International women Day:            5.13pm GMT       In the US, Michael Bennett of the NFLs Seattle Seahawks pledged his unconditional solidarity with the women strike on International women Day:  As a black man in America, I sometimes get overwhelmed and discouraged by what I see  from the police killings of unarmed black men, to the unequal educational system, to the mass incarceration of poor people of color in for-profit prisons. But when I look in my daughters eyes, I see the courage of Harriet Tubman, the patience of Rosa Parks, the soul of Ida B. Wells, the passion of Fannie Lou Hamer and the heart of Angela Davis. I see the future. I see hope. And Im inspired because it will be women who lead the future. That is why I am writing to express my unconditional solidarity with the women strike on International women Day, March 8. It would be easy for me to say that I am supporting this day of resistance because I have three daughters and I want nothing to stand in their way as they attempt to achieve their goals. I could also say that I am doing this because my wife, Pele  my best friend and soulmate  is of Samoan descent and has lived the struggle of being a women and the daughter of immigrants. But this issue is a lot bigger than my dreams for my own family. Its about the women across the earth who are suffering: women who are less worried about a glass ceiling than they are about a collapsing floor. Its about women of color across the earth who live on less than one dollar a day. Its about all women who are subject to sexual assault and violence.  Read more at the Players Tribune.       5.03pm GMT        Related: There is good news on gender equality  if you look to the developing world | Toyin Saraki    Worldwide, the gender gap  which includes employment, education, and earnings  actually got worse in 2016, according to the World Economic Forums Global Gender Gap Report. But Toyin Saraki wrote in December that the long-term trend is toward parity:  A reminder that while the status quo is unacceptable, the longer-term trend is pointed towards gender equality. And this trend is global, not simply confined to the western world. Just look at healthcare. Maternal mortality remains a mass killer in the developing world. It may not be as newsworthy as gender-based violence or as stark and immediate as disease or starvation, but it is the second biggest killer of women of reproductive age in the developing world. This is changing. Due to a concerted focus not least through the recently concluded UN Millennium Development Goals, the amount of women dying in childbirth has fallen by 45% since 1990. A staggering achievement. Gender-based development campaigns aimed at educating women have also pushed aside outmoded approaches to pregnancy and family planning, empowering women to take control of their own welfare in one of the most vulnerable periods of their lives. Improvement is also being made in education. While secondary education remains a critical problem in many developing countries, the challenge of primary school enrolment has virtually been solved. Enrolment rates globally are now on a near parity between boys and girls. And what of the workplace? The top-line figures may be bleak, but there is evidence to suggest slow change is happening. A study of 70 countries, including many in the developing world, showed that since 1995 the gender wage gap has narrowed from 28% to 20%. The gap is still far too big. But it is falling.        4.46pm GMT    Watch: Why is society so frightened of women without children?          video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    Childless: why is society so frightened of women without children?    The proportion of women not having children before the menopause has reached a record high in the last decade. In this video, women from the UK, France and Spain discuss the taboo of childlessness that they say comes from a dated societal structure, and mark International women Day by spotlighting female identity beyond motherhood.       4.17pm GMT       The tiny Balkan state of Montenegro saw hundreds protest state cuts to maternal aid. The AP reports:  Showing support on the International women Day, hundreds have joined a protest by women in tiny Montenegro against cuts in state aid for mothers of three or more children. Financial help for some 21,500 women in Montenegro - a country of 620,000 people - has been slashed by 25 percent amid efforts to tighten public spending. About half of the women on the list are jobless. Montenegrin women have been protesting for days demanding that the government decision be reversed. Protesters on Wednesday blocked traffic outside the parliament building in downtown Podgorica, the capital, shouting thieves. Montenegros economy has been weak despite recent progress in the Balkan countrys efforts at joining NATO and the European Union.        4.03pm GMT    The world's gender gap is on track to closein 169 years    The European Parliaments Greek vice president, Dimitris Papadimoulis, greeted International women Day with a shocking forecast from the World Economic Forum.  The World Economic Forum predicts that the gender gap wont close entirely until 2186, Papadimoulis told the parliament in a speech replayed on Greek media. Yes, you heard well, until 2186. Only in 169 years! It is more than obvious that we have to speed up this process. We have to act now. Greek women have suffered the countrys ongoing economic crisis disproportionately. Although seven years of economic meltdown have narrowed a gap in the employment rate between men and women  because of soaring unemployment rates among men, not an increase in the hiring of women  Greeces employment gender gap remains well above the European Union average. In 2015, the gap was 18 percentage points in Greece, compared with 11 across the rest of the EU. In a Facebook post to mark International women Day, Alexis Tsipras, Greeces leftist prime minister and leader of the Syriza political party, hailed the women worldwide who battle for equality, justice and dignity. He singled out Nadia Murrad, a former ISIS sex slave who is now a Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations.    Updated at 4.20pm GMT     3.54pm GMT    &quot;A Day Without a women,&quot; explained.          video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    International women Day: how can you support the global strike?    Women from more than 40 countries are staging a strike from all work, paid and unpaid, to highlight women power within global economies. But what if you cant join them? Here are other ways you can show solidarity, from wearing red to avoiding the shops for the day.       3.47pm GMT       A Guardian reader shares her International women Day protest from Switzerland:           One participant in Zurich   Editorial note: This has been uploaded on behalf of Bene In Zurich there was no formal strike organised, so I joined the International women Strike by partaking in a silent protest. I couldn&#39;t pass on the chance of standing up for what is right especially, in a movement that is taking part across so many countries. Instead of outright striking and not showing up to work, I am protesting through silence to raise awareness of gender-based inequalities. My protest started at 6am and I will not speak again until 6pm. I came to work wearing the sign in the picture. I work in a male dominated field, so this has been attracting a lot of attention which is good, but also incredibly scary. So far people have mostly ignored the huge sign hanging from my neck, but if anybody starts reading it, I hand them out a card with a short list of reasons to explain why I&#39;m doing this. Sometimes I am met with ridicule, but even then people want to engage and discuss. A couple of times there has been heartfelt support and admitarion. It&#39;s been hard and I have 5 more hours to go, but maybe, if we all keep at this, one day there will be progress.        Sent via GuardianWitness    By  GWitness   8 March 2017, 8:50         Updated at 9.00am GMT     3.35pm GMT    Outrage spreads over viral video of a teacher describing domestic abuse    On the eve of International women Day, a viral video of a teacher appearing to brag to his class about domestic abuse illustrated just how pervasive Mexicos machismo culture remains. The footage showed Ramn Urrea Bernal, a teacher at a public high school in Guadalajara, affirming that if his wife didnt consent to sex hed grab her by the hair, give her a fucking beating [and say] Hey stupid, if you dont know how to do anything else at least open your legs. The coarse, 90-second rant concluded with Urrea declaring that hed throw his wife and children out on the street if she denied him sex. It served as a stark reminder of how many in Mexico are exposed to misogyny from an early age. As outrage spread across social media yesterday, the university that runs the school said Urrea would face administrative procedures. Urrea apologised for his language but claimed he was merely acting out an example of domestic violence to highlight the problem. How dare he say these things when hes supposed to educate people? How are his pupils going to treat women with teachers like him? asked Karla, a 15-year-old student from the school. Instead of leading by example he does the opposite. Hes encouraging others to think like he does, added Giselle, another schoolgirl.  Its very worrying. These messages are reinforced everywhere in Mexico, in television, religion, the family and now even in schools, said Sofa Virgen, a local representative of the Latin American and Caribbean Committee for the Defence of women Rights. This creates the culture of machismo that results in people committing femicides.       3.28pm GMT    See photos from celebrations of International Women's Day around the world    Thousands worldwide gathered to protest the conditions for their countries women.   Related: International Women's Day around the world  in pictures    In Manila, the capital of the Philippines, protesters urged President Rodrigo Duterte to address the pressing problems of lack of food, jobs and peace instead of killings and violence.     AP Photo/Bullit Marquez Photograph: Bullit Marquez/AP    In Melbourne, Australia, thousands called for decolonization, and end to racism, economic justice for all women, and reproductive rights.     Daniel Pockett/Getty Images Photograph: Daniel Pockett/Getty Images    See more.       3.12pm GMT        s Day by turning around every book on their shelves written by a male author.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Courtesy Loganberry Books Photograph: Courtesy of Loganberry Books    A bookstore in Cleveland kicked off International women Day by turning around every volume on their shelves written by a male author. It took the eight employees of Loganberry Books, a new, used and rare bookstore with a feminist bent, two hours to go through nearly 10,000 titles.  The books will stay facing backwards for several weeks throughout women History month. Harriet Logan, the stores founder, said the act was a metaphor of silencing the male voice  at least for this month. From Heat Street:  To draw attention to female authors, a Cleveland bookstore celebrated women History Month by turning every male-written book in the fiction room backward on its shelf.   Eight of the all-female employees of Loganberry Books went through about 10,000 books, a process that took about two hours. Theyll leave the books turned around for the next two weeks.   Pictures are loud communicators, Harriett Logan, the bookstores founder and owner, told Heat Street. So we are in essence not just highlighting the disparity but bringing more focus to the women books now, because theyre the only ones legible on the shelf.   To give the floor and attention to women, you need to be able to hear them, Logan told Heat Street. And if someone else is talking over them, that just doesnt happen.        2.57pm GMT    &quot;Guerilla art&quot; on Wall Street calls for more women on corporate boards       Reuters/Brendan McDermid Photograph: Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters    As part of a campaign to push Wall Street firms to place more women on their boards, the U.S. fund manager State Street on Tuesday installed a statue of girl opposite the famous Charging Bull.  From Reuters:  Although women have made some headway against the glass ceiling, State Street said one out of four of the companies that make up the Russell 3000 Index still have no female representation on their boards. Today, we are calling on companies to take concrete steps to increase gender diversity on their boards, and have issued clear guidance to help them begin to take action, State Street Global Advisors CEO Ron OHanley said in a statement. Much the same as the charging bull, the little bronze girl by artist Kristen Visbal was put up in the wee hours of the morning as guerilla art, McNally said. But, unlike the bull, the firm discussed it with the city beforehand so that it could remain at least temporarily. Were actively pursuing that it stays for a month, she said. If the city decides that it should stay in perpetuity, were absolutely on board with that.        2.43pm GMT    Thousands in Dublin protest the criminalization of abortion    In Irelands capital, thousands of demonstrators blocked traffic in the city center to protest the countrys near-total ban on abortion.  \">   &lt;a href=&quot;Shannon (@_shxnn) &lt;a href=&quot;8, 2017&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/blockquote&gt;&lt;script async src=&quot;//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js&quot; charset=&quot;utf-8&quot;&gt;&lt;/script&gt;&lt;/body&gt;&lt;/html&gt;\">     Large crowds have blocked O&#39;Connell Bridge in Dublin as part of #Strike4Repeal protest: pic.twitter.com/dMUvaFArLu&mdash; Newstalk (@NewstalkFM) March 8, 2017      Anyone who thinks young people don&#39;t care about politics should come witness #Strike4Repeal takeover of O&#39;C Bridge pic.twitter.com/xPFVPssgDh&mdash; Pdraig Rice (@PadraigRice) March 8, 2017         2.32pm GMT         DC: Join us 12pm today at a #DayWithoutAwomen gathering with Women in Congress pic.twitter.com/KGbRkhngSV&mdash; Women&#39;s March (@womenmarch) March 8, 2017    The women March is calling on people in Washington, DC to rally on the steps of Congress while Democratic women in the US House stage a symbolic walkout.       2.29pm GMT             video\"            data-video-provider=\"Independent\"            >    I march for ______: a look at female activism in Trumps America    In celebration of International women Day, the short film I March for ______, directed by Sam Campodonico-Ludwig, examines the growth of women activism in the US with an intimate look at their divisions and similarities.       2.20pm GMT    IWD in Argentina     Related: Why the #NiUnaMenos marchers are demanding a better Argentina for women | Soledad Vallejos    In Argentina, a day of protest kicks off at 12pm ART with a ruidazo  a widespread, noisy protest carried out by banging objects, usually pots and pans, from balconies or on sidewalks outside the home or workplace. The ruidazo will be followed by a 5pm march in the capital city of Buenos Aires from Congress to the Casa Rosada presidential palace. Argentina is home to the Ni Una Menos movement (or Not One Less, meaning notone more women lost to male violence) a grassroots response to Argentinas high rates of deadly domestic violence. From 2008 to 2016, the rate at which Argentinian women are murdered shot up 78%. In 2012, Argentina passed a law in 2012 that recognized domestic violence homicides and honor killings as femicide. There were 322 victims of femicide last year in Argentina, or one women murdered every 30 hours. So far in 2017, the violence has not abated. Casa del Encuentro NGO, a safe home for victims of male violence, estimates that this year, one women has died every 18 hours as a result of intimate partner or family violence. Todays 5pm march will be titled Were Not All Here, in reference to the women lives have been lost.    Updated at 2.22pm GMT     1.58pm GMT       More school districts in the US are shutting down as the #DayWithoutAwomen campaign leaves them short-handed. Chapel Hill-Carrboro City Schools in North Carolina, Alexandria Virginia Public Schools in Virginia, and now, Prince Georges County in Maryland:       Several Prince Georges County schools are still serving lunch for students who rely on its school lunch program.       1.47pm GMT    In the US, Women Democrats in the House will stage a walkout    In the US House of Representatives, Democratic women are planning to stage a walkout Wednesday afternoon in solidarity with the women strike. Several of them will speak in honor of International women Day, the Hill reports, and then, shortly after noon, they will walk out. I think its important women in Congress show our solidarity, Rep. Lois Frankel, of Florida, told the Hill. Frankel helped arrange the walkout. The women wont be missing any votes, such as a vote on a defense spending bill that is expected to pass. We considered a lot of different options, but our feeling is that there is so much mischief going on in this Congress that we cannot turn our backs, Frankel said. We think it would actually be sort of the opposite of what were trying to accomplish.       1.38pm GMT       International women Day is getting underway in the Americas. In the US, some media companies are already participating in the women strike, or #DayWithoutAwomen. MTVs social media accounts are on autopilot:  s striking today. All posts have been scheduled. Find out more at #DayWithoutAwomen\">  s striking today. All posts have been scheduled. Find out more at &lt;a href=&quot;&lt;a href=&quot;&lt;a href=&quot;MTV (@MTV) &lt;a href=&quot;8, 2017&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/blockquote&gt;&lt;script async src=&quot;//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js&quot; charset=&quot;utf-8&quot;&gt;&lt;/script&gt;&lt;/body&gt;&lt;/html&gt;\">   And the news sites Bustle and Romper have gone dark completely:  For 24 hours, we will not be creating any new content on either of our sites or on any of our sites social channels. Because, quite simply, without women, there is no Bustle. There is no Romper. Without our editorial team, which is 97 percent female, we would be unable to produce a site that aims to provide support and a megaphone for women to express how theyre feeling about the world. And theres no time like the present to prove just how important those women voices are to the world  to media, to business, and beyond.  Some of its staff will spend the day volunteering for domestic violence shelters, food banks, and other charities that reach out to women and marginalized communities in need.       1.25pm GMT       International women Day events will be continuing throughout the globe today, and I am now handing over to my colleague Molly Redden in New York.  Thank you to everyone who has tweeted, commented and emailed - and apologies to those I didnt get time to answer or include.  We still want your stories:  You can contribute via Guardian Witness here Tweet Molly on @mtredden         1.17pm GMT    Call for more statues to celebrate women in the UK      Can you tell we were having a hoot? statue to celebrate women biscuit factory workers, past and present #crackerpackers @helenpidd #iwd2017 pic.twitter.com/bkzpikW7yT&mdash; Hazel Reeves (@HazelReeves) March 8, 2017    Across the north of England, pressure is building for more women to be celebrated in statue form.  In many cities and towns, the only women immortalised in stone or marble are either Queen Victoria, naked nymphs or other allegorical figures. In Carlisle, sculptor Hazel Reeves has just been commissioned to produce a statue of two cracker packers  female workers at the local McVities biscuit factory.  Reeves has recently been shortlisted or the Emmeline Pankhurst statue commission for St Peters Square, Manchester, and is well-known for her seven foot bronze sculpture of Sir Nigel Gresley in Kings Cross Station.  In Leeds, local MP Rachel Reeves is leading the call for a new female statue to join Henry Moores naked reclining lady outside the city art gallery. Possible subjects include Olympic gold boxer Nicola Adams, social reformer Mary Gawthorpe, novelist Barbara Taylor Bradford or cycling hero Beryl Burton.        1.15pm GMT    IWD in Italy      Italy celebrates International Women&#39;s Day with FREE entry to all museums and cultural sites! #BeBoldForChange #IWD2017 #IWD #8marzoalmuseo pic.twitter.com/NxtMdnVggz&mdash; CPPP (@CultinConflict) March 3, 2017    Italy is marking International women Day by giving women free entry to all museum and cultural sites.  But on a much more sober note, Italian president Sergio Mattarella used a speech in honour of IWD at the Presidential Palace in Rome to highlight the tragic, disturbing social emergency of femicide in Italy following a raft of high-profile murders. According to statistics released late last year, more than 100 women are killed in Italy each year in acts that are considered to be gender-related, in most cases by a womens partner or ex-partner. It is estimated that another 3.5m women have been victims of stalking but that only 22 per cent of those victims have reported the incidents or sought help, according to Istat, the national statistics agency. Mattarella thanked women for their daily and often strenuous action in favour of a fairer society, more welcoming, more united and integrated.       1.05pm GMT         Strike for women rights  we have a world to win, and the fight starts here | Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor Guardian Opinion (@guardianopinion) March 8, 2017    Impressive smack down from Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor of people who have dismissed todays strike for International women Day as privileged.   There have been some who have suggested that in calling for women to strike we are jeopardising those who do not have the luxury to call off work. Indeed, organisers of the women strike have even been described as privileged. This is as ridiculous as it condescending to both the organisers and working-class women, who apparently are not viewed as capable of making decisions about their own activity on 8 March. Aside from ensuring there are multiple ways for women and their supporters to participate in the strike  including taking part in actions at work such as wearing red, as a gesture of solidarity  we have been inspired by the genuine grassroots nature that is animating cities, colleges, and communities across the country.  ...  In total, there are more than 60 events planned as part of todays strike. We have no idea how many people will participate. I dont expect the same millions who came out on 21 January to take part. But I do suspect thousands will be involved, and that is significant. The point was never to just hold a successful event, but to begin to knit together a network of ordinary people who can revive the struggles for racial and economic justice, sexual liberation and reproductive freedom that have always been at the nexus of the struggle for women liberation. We have a world to win, and the women strike is an important step in that process.        12.55pm GMT    Protesters arrest in Russia: reports         AFP are reporting that a group of feminist activists have been detained in Moscow, after protesting by the Kremlin walls with a banner reading Men have been in power 200 years, down with them! AFP reports:  OVD Info, a website that monitors detentions of activists, wrote that seven people were detained including two journalists from Novaya Gazeta opposition newspaper and a photographer and taken to a police station for questioning. Rights lawyer Mari Davtyan wrote on Facebook that eight had been detained including journalists. One of the detained activists, performance artist Yekaterina Nenasheva, posted a video of the protest on Facebook showing the activists standing on top of an artificial grotto in a park by the Kremlin walls, holding smoke flares. Moscow and St Petersburg feminists who seized the Kremlin congratulate you on March 8, Nenasheva wrote. The activists banner referred to the fact that Russias last female ruler was Catherine the Great, who died in 1796, more than 200 years ago. TV Rain independent channel reported that the women also carried banners reading A women for president and We are the majority. The protest resembled those by punk group Pussy Riot, who in 2012 lit flares and sang a song about President Vladimir Putin on a platform on Red Square. March 8 is a public holiday in Russia but is mainly celebrated by giving flowers and chocolates to women rather than stressing the need for gender equality. In a video address to the nations women, Putin said that he and other men will do all we can so that our beloved women are lavished with care and attention and smile more often.        12.49pm GMT    More funding for UK domestic violence services    The UK government has announced 20m of funding for services to support women and children who are victims of domestic violence in todays budget.    New #domesticabuse funding announced! Great news - as 1/3 specialist services now have NO dedicated funds #IWD2017 Polly Neate (@pollyn1) March 8, 2017    Polly Neate, Chief Executive of women Aid, welcomed the desperately needed boost to the sector:  Its not a moment too soon, as women Aids most recent national survey found that a third of domestic abuse services are running with no dedicated funding. The Prime Ministers strong commitment to helping survivors of domestic abuse is a fitting message for International women Day. With two women a week on average being killed by a partner or ex-partner in England and Wales, something has to change.        12.40pm GMT    IWD in Germany    When I left my flat for work this morning, my male neighbour from downstairs made a point of congratulating me on International women Day and warmly shook my hand. The day has more significance for ordinary citizens here than it does in the UK - most particularly in eastern parts, where under communism women - almost all of whom had jobs - were feted on this day, with flowers or being given time off work, sometimes even meals or drinks laid on by the boss, etc. Almost 30 years after the collapse of communism, this still happens in some workplaces, though the tradition is dying out.  Its considered important enough that editorials in several leading German newspapers choose focus on it, arguing that recent global developments underline how we need IWD more than ever at a time when women rights are so under attack.  The liberal Sddeutsche Zeitung from Munich writes: The rise of populists in Germany, Russia, Turkey, America, Hungary, France and Poland has changed everything. They have brought back an image of women which we had thought had long been overcome. In Russia domestic violence will in future be treated as a much milder crime than it was previously, despite the fact that every year 12,000 women are battered to death by their partners. We should be under no illusion - despite regional differences, rights are being eroded in a similarly retrograde and discriminatory way. women rights are not collateral damage in the fight for the greater good, they are a barometer, a symptom of the internal state of a society. According to The Leipziger Volkszeitung: Trump, Putin and Erdogan are currently competing with each other in front of all of us for the position of biggest macho. What should we be doing to counteract this particularly difficult to deal with type of man?...Our motto should be the world needs strong women. The Lausitzer Rundschau, from Cottbus (like Leipzig in the former communist east) comments: those who wants to change something but trusts in politics to do this, will wait forever. It was never a comfortable thing to fight for rights and freedoms. Dear women, you must become active yourselves, strengthen your networks and stand up together for your common interests. And we men should be your allies in this, and not just on this day.       12.36pm GMT       This is wonderful footage of the Suffragettes marching on London in 1915 for the right to vote and equal pay from the British Film Insitute.    The fight for women&#39;s rights, 1915: Suffragettes march on London for equal pay and the right to vote #BritainOnFilm #InternationalwomenDay pic.twitter.com/ICthcuLhJa&mdash; BFI (@BFI) March 8, 2017         12.25pm GMT    IWD in Spain      On #IWD, my i/v with @CapdeArguelles - Retrieving an untold story: voices of #Spanish female artists finally heard Sam Jones (@swajones) March 8, 2017    Some campaigners have argued that Spain still overlooks the massive contribution that women have made to society, culture and arts. As part of Madrids belated efforts to honour some of the women who have been overshadowed by their more famous male peers, the citys mayor will unveil a plaque today to commemorate the Lyceum women Club, a meeting place for some of the leading intellectuals of pre-civil war Spain. The drive to remember their lives and contributions with plaques is being led by Nuria Capdevila-Argelles, a professor of Hispanic and gender studies at the University of Exeter. Capdevila-Argelles, and her film-maker collaborator, Tania Ballo, have so far provided the city council with research on more than 15 women, including the journalist, actor, writer and diplomat Isabel Oyarzbal, the lawyer and politician Victoria Kent and the poet Ernestina de Champourcn. People, both Spanish and British, have written about Spains ghosts, but the most important ghosts are the women  the invisible 50%, Capdevila-Argelles told the Guardian recently. The role of history and an awareness of our past is utterly fundamental. Its about learning about our diversity, our cultural heritage, about learning about our first attempt at genuine democracy at the beginning of the 20th century, which failed. We need to learn from our past; its there as a lesson.       12.20pm GMT       This is a fascinating tale of the history of women in science for International women Day.  Rousing words:  [E]ven though it may increasingly feel like the end of the road for those enlightenment values that people around the world will march for on 22 April, as long as we show up, we have hope. A quote normally attributed to the anthropologist Margaret Mead puts it best: Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world. Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.        12.15pm GMT    IWD in the Asia Pacific region      .@diyana_yahaya tells why she is striking today #IWD2017 #GlobalStrike #womentrike pic.twitter.com/ePP24M8yag&mdash; APWLD (@apwld) March 8, 2017    More than 500 women in Thailand, Philippines and India participated in a global solidarity strike for their rights today, according to The Asia Pacific Forum on Women Law and Development (APWLD).  APWLDs Regional Coordinator Kate Lappin said:  This action is part of ongoing efforts to increase the power of global solidarity strikes as we believe solidarity is the only possible antidote to the growing authoritarianism, deepening inequalities, runaway climate change and sexist leadership the world is experiencing.  Edna Velarde of Amihan National Federation of Peasant Women , Philippines said:  The peasant women joined todays strike to call on the Duterte administration to turn down neoliberal policies detrimental to the country and fulfill its promises to the Filipino people to provide land to the tillers, food on the table and respect for human rights.   Elizabeth Khumallambam of Nari Shakti Manch, India said:  Women working in unorganized sector continue to face discrimination - unequal wages, sexual harassment at workplaces, absence of social security and maternity benefits. In voicing these suppressions, our strength lies in solidarities across spectrums.         12.11pm GMT         How to win a feminist battle  six activists share their secrets | Leymah Gbowee, Laura Coryton, Krystyna Kacpura, Guardian Opinion (@guardianopinion) March 8, 2017    This is an absolute must read for International women Day, six inspiring activists share their secrets about how to win a feminist battle.  This from Leymah Gwobee, part of a group of mothers ended Liberias civil war via non-violent action, including a sex strike:  We were ordinary mothers who decided it was no longer enough to beg for peace. Instead, we came together to demand peace, justice, equality and inclusion in political decision-making. We used our bodies, broken by hunger, poverty, desperation and destitution, to stare down the barrel of the gun. Fourteen years later, we can comfortably say that we did the unimaginable.         12.02pm GMT    women dies in Wolverhampton, UK    Sobering news of a domestic stabbing in Wolverhampton in the UK on IWD. It is believed a man attacked two women, killing one and critically injuring another before killing himself.  According to women Aid on average two women are killed by their partner or ex-partner every week in England and Wales.  This from my colleague Jamie Grierson:   Two people have died following a domestic stabbing at a block of flats, including the attacker, in a Wolverhampton incident that sparked a significant emergency services response including armed police and air ambulances. Police were called to a block of flats in Leasowes Drive, in the Merry Hill area of the city, at around 9.45am where it is believed a man attacked two women before inflicting stab injuries on himself, West Midlands police said. Officers used stun grenades as they stormed the flat in a bid to distract and detain the knifeman, the force said. A women believed to be in her 30s died at the scene while the male suspect, also believed to be in his 30s, was pronounced dead a short time later, WMP said.        11.48am GMT       Nadja Sayej has written a lovely piece about the Iranian TV that is promoting women rights. Worth a read this IWD. Heres a taster:  Oops, I did it again, was Maryam Faghihimanis reaction when the Iranian regime accused her TV show of the horrible crime of promoting women rights. She immediately took to Facebook, explaining to her friends that a state news site had also blurred out her bare arms and legs, to protect their honour. I am humble and proud of those crimes and sin, she added, and will continue my efforts. Satellite TV is becoming a powerful way for Iranian women to connect with the wider world. Over 70% of Iranian households have satellites to watch international television, and one of the most popular stations is the London-based Manoto TV. A liberal Persian channel with over three million Facebook followers, Manoto airs reality TV, cooking shows  and now, its first ever women talk show, a Middle Eastern version of the American smash-hit The View. The show  Samte No (which translates as New Direction)  is a huge step forward in a country where YouTube and other anti-Islamic websites are blocked and it is banned for women to dance, perform music on stage, ride bikes, watch male sports teams, wear leggings or reject their husbands sexual advances. Wearing makeup or even nail polish, youll pay a fine, explains Faghihimani. Hijab is mandatory and any tight outfits will result in arrest by the moral police.        11.44am GMT       This from GuardianWitness:   s Day with five generations of women in her family\" width=\"1000\" height=\"667\" class=\"gu-image\" />   Kripa Joshi, an illustrator from Nepal, is celebrating International women Day with five generations of women in her family.  She is also the creator of the character Miss Moti who emerged from Kripas struggle with weight and whose name means a big women in Nepali. To mark today shes highlighting some Miss Moti-vational messages.    Updated at 11.49am GMT     11.40am GMT    Donald Trump tweets to mark IWD    Feminists striking, marching and wearing red in solidarity for International women Day today will surely be delighted to hear that US president Donald Trump has tweeted to mark the day.     On International Women&#39;s Day, join me in honoring the critical role of women here in America &amp; around the world.&mdash; Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 8, 2017      I have tremendous respect for women and the many roles they serve that are vital to the fabric of our society and our economy.&mdash; Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 8, 2017    For fun, here is a truncated selection of the times Trump has been accused of misogyny:  Bragged he could grab [women] by the pussy and kiss and grope them because he is a star. Briefly advocated some form of punishment for women who had abortions Attacked the Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly, calling her a bimbo incapable of objectivity when there was blood coming out of her whatever - widely interpreted as a thinly veiled reference to her menstrual cycle. As Kelly pointed out Trump has, at different times, called women you dont like fat pigs, dogs, slobs and disgusting animals.   Critics reacted accordingly:    @yashar @realDonaldTrump there is literally a Wikipedia page about his boasts of sexual assault. Justin Hendrix (@justinhendrix) March 8, 2017      .@realDonaldTrump Was calling Megyn Kelley a &quot;news bimbo&quot; showing her tremendous respect?&mdash; Jordan Uhl (@JordanUhl) March 8, 2017    Never shy of getting in on the action, singer Lily Allen tweeted:    .@realDonaldTrump FREE MELANIA&mdash; Lily (@lilyallen) March 8, 2017         11.09am GMT    IWD in Poland      Party time at Law and Justice HQ. #IWD pic.twitter.com/ipk4JIzC1v&mdash; Christian Davies (@crsdavies) March 8, 2017     This years International women Day has huge resonance in Warsaw and across Poland.  Today women have gathered outside the Law and Justice headquarters to protest at continuing discrimination against women and to stand up for women reproductive rights.  Polish women attracted worldwide attention in October during the so-called Black Protest against a blanket ban on abortion under consideration in the Polish parliament that would have prohibited terminations under almost all circumstances, including of pregnancies resulting from rape and incest. The government beat a hasty retreat in the face of the protests, but campaigners warn that Polish women remain under threat from the government and its relationship with hardline elements of the Polish Catholic Church - a feeling shared by many believers and non-believers alike. As Jaga, 34, told the Guardian:   Whether you have experienced childbirth, or you know someone whose child died after delivery, or you know someone having to raise a disabled child alone, women are sharing stories.  These are not topics you raise at the dinner table at Christmas, but thanks to the abortion bill, people started to talk about them.  It is the first IWM since many Polish women found their voice, and won. There is now a palpable sense that if and when change comes to Poland, it will have been its women that won it.   s Day rally in Warsaw, Poland.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Actor Jessica Chastain joins an International women Day rally in Warsaw, Poland. Photograph: East News/REX/Shutterstock      Updated at 11.40am GMT     11.00am GMT    Women across the globe: #BeBoldForChange    The UK governments department of international development are having a busy International women Day and have made this short video highlighting the work of women who manifest this years theme of #BeBoldForChange. International Development Secretary Priti Patel said:  We all know that women are part of the solution; that women participation in education, health, politics and peace building increases the chances of a more prosperous and stable future. Yet we must also remain alive to the many challenges that still come before girls and women to have an equal part in this story. So we stand with them all, in every way.                   10.52am GMT    IWD in Spain      On #IWD, my i/v with @CapdeArguelles - Retrieving an untold story: voices of #Spanish female artists finally heard Sam Jones (@swajones) March 8, 2017    Seventeen women have been killed so far this year by their partners or ex-partners in Spain, writes my colleague Sam Jones in Madrid. The figure means that more women have died as a result of gender-based violence in the first four months of 2017 than died over the course of last year, when the total stood at 11.  Statistics also show that this year has already overtaken 2008 (15 deaths) as the worst year on record for such violence. The situation has prompted protests and led a group of women to go on a month-long hunger strike in the famous Puerta del Sol square in central Madrid. The strikers ended their protest on Tuesday but vowed to press on with their 25-point plan to tackle gender-based violence.       10.46am GMT    IWD in Germany    The German composer Fanny Mendelssohn is finally due to be recognised in Britain as a musician with the talent to match her brother, the more famous Felix, when a piano sonata long attributed to him is performed at lunchtime today. The British premiere of Fannys Easter Sonata which will be broadcast on BBC Radio 3 at 1pm - is as much a tribute to the German women, who wrote it 140 years ago, as it is to the many women composers over the ages who have not received the recognition they deserve. The manuscript of Easter Sonata was first identified as being Fannys work in 2010, when an American academic, Angela Mace Christian, tracked it down to a private archive in France and had it analysed. Fanny was only 23 when she wrote it. She had referred to the piece in her diary, including the fact she had played it at home in April 1829. But like most of the 500 works she wrote, it never came to public attention.Pianist Sofya Gulyak will resurrect the work at the Royal College of Music. Fannys great great great granddaughter, Shiela Hayman, tells her story in The Guardian today.        10.42am GMT    IWD in France    In France a strike called for by feminist organisations is due to start at 3h40 this afternoon. This is the symbolic time after which French women are considered to work for free when their wages are compared with male colleagues. In Paris there will be a gathering at Place de la Rpublique at 2pm followed by a march to Place de lopera at 5.30. There are protests in cities across France. But a recent controversy suggests France still has a long way to go before achieving gender equality.  Green party MP Denis Baupin was last year investigated after claims of sexual aggression and harassment against four women. The women were, according to investigators, convincing witnesses, giving measured declarations that did not change and were corroborated... about events some of which could be considered criminal. One of the women is a French MP for the Green/Ecology party, one is the party secretary, one a local mayor and one a regional councillor. However, the case was dropped because it was out of time as the alleged harassment happened in the late 1990s.Now, Baupin, 54, has said he is going to sue the women for making false accusations.       10.40am GMT    Putin wishes Russian women 'Happy Women's Day'    Russian president Vladimir Putin has issued a gushing message to the women of Russia, praising their beauty and vitality and, of course, their timekeeping abilities.     Today is International Women&#39;s Day. Congratulations from the President pic.twitter.com/MY4zqRIJgC&mdash; President of Russia (@KremlinRussia_E) March 8, 2017    In a statement Putin said:  Dear women: mothers, grandmothers, daughters, wives, friends, our nearest and dearest ones, please accept my heartfelt congratulations on International women Day! You fill this world with beauty and vitality, giving warmth and comfort, cordiality and harmony with your tenderness and generosity of spirit. You care day and night for your children, grandchildren and your family. Even today, on International women Day, you are still caught up in your routine, working tirelessly, always on time. We often ask ourselves, how do they manage it all?  Many have pointed out that Putin has recently signed into law a controversial amendment that decriminalises some forms of domestic violence.    Dear women, who only exist in relationship to men, keep up the good work. If you don&#39;t, we can legally beat you. pollyrt (@pollyrt) March 8, 2017      @KremlinRussia_E Do not pretend you care about women, with the law you just introduced, making domestic violence acceptable again!&mdash; Rose (@Rakpenguin63) March 8, 2017     s Day.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A Moscow Metro employee gives tulips to a colleague at Komsomolskaya Station of the Moscow Metro to mark women Day. Photograph: TASS      Updated at 11.43am GMT     10.08am GMT    Sexist Polish lawmaker to be punished    On International women day the president of the European Parliament hhas vowed that a Polish lawmaker will be punished for sexist comments he made last week. EU parliament President Antonio Tajani said that he intends to bring a swift conclusion to the probe into the remarks of radical right-winger Janusz Korwin-Mikke at the legislature and promised a penalty commensurate with the gravity of the offence. During a debate on the pay gap between men and women Korwin-Mikke said: Of course women must earn less than men because they are weaker, they are smaller, they are less intelligent. They must earn less, thats all.    Arguing for a return to the Stone Age: Polish member of EU parliament Janusz Korwin-Mikke. Nicely shut down by @IratxeGarper. via @dw_europe pic.twitter.com/NBFGaU4qGT&mdash; Andrew Stroehlein (@astroehlein) March 3, 2017    He could face sanctions such as a reprimand, a temporary suspension or a fine. Hopefully a big one.        10.03am GMT    IWD in the Middle East      #GCHR marks International women Day 2017 in solidarity with WHRDs in the Gulf and neighbouring countriesGulf Centre 4 HR (@GulfCentre4HR) March 8, 2017    In the Middle East the Gulf Centre for Human Rights (GCHR) is marking International women Day with a timely reminder of the need for greater protection for women human rights defenders in the region. On IWD a march will take take in Lebanon, organised by the WHRDs Middle East and North Africa Coalition. Here is a sobering reminder of the dangers and harassment people fighting for equality face in many countries throughout the world.   In 2017, hundreds of women are still in captivity, detention, exile, many are under surveillance, travel bans and judicial harassment, while others are subjected to torture, disappearance or murder as a result of their human rights activities. In conflict zones, targeting women increases in parallel with the increase of violence, where sexual violence against girls and women is used as a tool of war, human trafficking, and early marriage plus other types of targetings puts women at greater risk.  The organisation points out that women in Iraq, Iraqi Kurdistan, Syria, and Yemen are targeted daily just for being women. According to the GCHR they work under government surveillance, risk of persecution, detention and torture for demanding their basic rights such as social rights in Iran, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, and political rights in Bahrain, while others are struggling to have a voice in shrinking civil spaces in countries including the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. The organisation points to 2017 as a year of momentous change for women in the middle east:  Despite all odds, women refuse to be submissive, oppressed, marginalised, used and excluded; instead they have found strength in solidarity, and collaborative work. The beginning of this year showed how women can mobilise their efforts to refuse patriarchy and challenge the status quo.         9.46am GMT    Iceland becomes first country to require proof of equal pay    If you needed any more reason to love the small but powerful nation of Iceland, heres another: the country has just become the first country in the world to require companies to prove they offer equal pay regardless of gender, ethnicity, sexuality and nationality. This from the ministry of Social Affairs and Equality:  The certification requires companies with more than 25 employees to not only offer equal pay for equal work, but also equal pay for work of the same value. The Equal Pay Standard, on which the certification requirements are based, does this by assessing a companys pay policies, classification of jobs according to equal value and wage research on the basis of the classification, as well as formalizing policies and processes related to pay decisions.  The move aims to help the country achieve its aim of eradicating the countrys gender gap by 2022 Icelands Minister of Social Affairs and Equality, orsteinn Vglundsson said:   As a country we set ourselves the challenge to eradicate the gender pay gap by 2022 but, despite taking steps such as introducing dedicated paid leave for new dads and 40% quotas for women on boards of larger companies, we have not made the progress we would have wished. It is the right time to do something radical about this issue.  We want to show the world that eradicating the gender pay gap is an achievable goal and we hope other nations will follow suit in adopting the Equal Pay Standard in years to come.  Iceland has a long and proud history of leading the way on gender equality. For the past eight years it has topped the World Economic Forums gender gap index.  The Economist recently named Iceland the worlds best place for working women  in comparison, the UK came in at No. 24. You can read the joyous story of 90% of Icelandic women going on strike in 1975 here.    Updated at 9.50am GMT     9.31am GMT    IWD in UK parliament    The UK parliament Women and Equalities Select Committee have done a video encouraging women to get into politics.     On #IWD some of our members and our Chair discuss #WomeninParliament #BeBoldForChange @jessphillips @Maria_MillerMP @AngelaCrawleyMP pic.twitter.com/4tFNqid8Lp&mdash; Women&amp;EqualitiesCtte (@Commonswomequ) March 8, 2017    The chair Maria Miller told me for a IWD story last week, that the WESC has been made permanent. Also, she believed having a female prime minister - coupled with MPs from both sides of the divide being prepared to work for common goals - was making a quiet difference to improving policy on women issues.  Its worth following @5050Parliament for the campaign for better female representation in the UK parliament.     Yeah let&#39;s fix the #PowerGap call for #EqualSay SIGN &amp; SHARE !!! 50:50 Parliament (@5050Parliament) March 8, 2017    If you want to take one small action for IWD, you can sign their petition here:        9.15am GMT       An example of how people are using this years IWD to fight for political goals can be seen in Ireland. where women are preparing to strike and march in a bid to push the government to call a referendum on reproductive rights. People are gathering on the bridge in Dublin at 12.30.  You can read more about the push to repeal the 8th amendment, which amounts to a constitutional ban on abortion in Ireland, by my colleague Henry McDonald.    CLOSED today in solidarity @Strike_4_Repeal its time4Irish women to make choices over their own bodies &amp; lives, it&#39;s time to #repealthe8th pic.twitter.com/li7z0zGYT7&mdash; Bang Bang (@BangBangD7) March 8, 2017      If you&#39;re in Dublin, meet me on the Bridge at 12:30#strike4repeal #wewontwait pic.twitter.com/V94XPTm5fP&mdash; Strike 4 Repeal (@Strike_4_Repeal) March 4, 2017         8.52am GMT       If youre taking part in an event to mark International women Day, wed like you to share your experiences, photographs and video with us. If youre not taking part in an event, you can send your messages of support too. You can click on the blue Contribute button at the top of the live blog. We recognise it may not always be safe to record or share your experiences  so please think about this when sharing your content with GuardianWitness.       8.49am GMT    Wikipedia honours women for IWD    Thanks to Rob Shaw who has directed me to the resplendent front page of Wikipedia today, which - among other fabulous women - is celebrating the achievements of top scouser Bessie Braddock. Its worth checking out.     Bessie Braddock is the featured article on the front of Wikipedia today @LexyTopping #InternationalwomenDay&mdash; Rob Shaw (@WhatIsRobShaw) March 8, 2017         8.27am GMT       In Sheffield in the UK protesters are using the Women of Steel statue [see my colleague Helen Pidds previous story on the statue here] to voice their opposition to the new Bishop of Sheffields views on the ordination of women.     The Women of Steel statue being used today by protesters opposed to the new Bishop of Sheffield&#39;s views on ordination of women @BBCSheffield pic.twitter.com/mRZId1yCR5&mdash; Andy Kershaw (@andyksheffield) March 8, 2017         8.16am GMT       Hello from London! And happy International women Day to all. Huge thanks to the incredible Claire Phipps who has put in a sterling shift for the sisterhood from Australia.  Ill be here for much of the day and I would love to hear your stories and see pictures of how you are marking the day. Are you striking? Wearing a specific colour? Get in touch!  Im on alexandra.topping@theguardian.com and on twitter @lexytopping   glass ceiling during rally to mark International women Day in Tbilisi, Georgia.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"655\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Women perform behind glass ceiling during rally to mark International women Day in Tbilisi, Georgia. Photograph: David Mdzinarishvili/Reuters      Updated at 11.46am GMT     8.01am GMT       Im handing over the blog now to my colleague Lexy Topping in London  shell continue to update you on events, protests and everything else as International women Day continues its way around the globe. Thanks for reading and for your comments and contributions  do keep them coming.       7.50am GMT    A day without women?    A key feature of 2017s International women Day is the call for a day without women  for women to take the day off work (paid and unpaid, at home and out of the home); to avoid shopping for the day,with exceptions for small, women- and minority-owned businesses; and to wear red in solidarity. In America, the call to strike has been led by the organisers of the women March, which took place across the US (and the world) the day after Trumps inauguration. A group of feminist activists and academics wrote recently in the Guardian about the need to strike:  The idea is to mobilise women, including trans women, and all who support them in an international day of struggle  a day of striking, marching, blocking roads, bridges, and squares, abstaining from domestic, care and sex work, boycotting, calling out misogynistic politicians and companies, striking in educational institutions. These actions are aimed at making visible the needs and aspirations of those whom lean-in feminism ignored: women in the formal labor market, women working in the sphere of social reproduction and care, and unemployed and precarious working women. In embracing a feminism for the 99%, we take inspiration from the Argentinian coalition Ni Una Menos. Violence against women, as they define it, has many facets: it is domestic violence, but also the violence of the market, of debt, of capitalist property relations, and of the state; the violence of discriminatory policies against lesbian, trans and queer women; the violence of state criminalization of migratory movements; the violence of mass incarceration; and the institutional violence against women bodies through abortion bans and lack of access to free healthcare and free abortion.  But Guardian columnist Lindy West, speaking on Australian TV this week, while agreeing that protest is most effective when it disrupts peoples lives, echoed concerns of others who are cautious about the proposed strike:  It would be tremendously effective if we could mobilise every single women in the world  A concern for me, as a very privileged, financially stable white women who works from home  its very easy for me to say yes, everyone should go on strike but I want to be very cognisant of the fact there are very many women who cannot afford to lose one days worth of pay, let alone risk their job.  You can find details of strikes and other protests taking place around the world from Australia to Uruguay via the links on this page. And here are some ways you can take part if youre not striking:        video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    International women Day: how can you support the global strike?         7.45am GMT       Brendan Cox, whose wife Jo Cox was murdered last year, has shared this picture of the Labour MP for International women Day:    Jo was passionate, beautiful, fearless, compassionate&amp; strong.A role model for her daughter (and son) on International Women&#39;s day #IWD2017 pic.twitter.com/hQIdLSuhYM&mdash; Brendan Cox (@MrBrendanCox) March 7, 2017      Updated at 7.46am GMT     7.39am GMT       In the UK, International women Day coincides  or collides  with the Budget. Labour peer Shami Chakrabarti argues that austerity is a feminist issue, with women more likely to be single parents, earn less and work part-time than their male counterparts.        video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    Shami Chakrabarti: austerity is a feminist issue         7.27am GMT    So, when's International Men's Day?    Its 19 November, since you ask. If youd like to hear more about how International Mens Day is on 19 November, can I suggest you follow comedian Richard Herring on Twitter, as he endures his annual feat of replying to all the people wondering when International Mens Day is. Heres what Herring wrote for the Guardian on International Mens Day in 2015:  International women Day is on 8 March: 24 hours (of the 8,760 annually available) set aside to celebrate women and all of their achievements. And people get furious about it. Surely, you might think, you could only be cross about it because that definitely isnt enough time to celebrate the achievements of over than 50% of the population. But no  So for the last two International women Days I have tried to highlight this stupidity. I have got up early, logged on to Twitter and searched for the phrase international mens day, found every single person who has tweeted the question and responded to them all individually: Its 19 November. There are thousands to get through. It goes on relentlessly, for hours and hours, but I try to get to them all because to see the same moronic question asked over and over again by people (who dont even think just to check Google to make sure theyre not making an arse of themselves) is very funny, and shows exactly why an international women day is necessary. Incidentally, nobody tweets me back to say: Oh thanks for the information. I was wondering when it was. Almost like they dont want to know the answer to their own question. My hope is that if I can spend a day a year dealing with this issue, then that means that everyone else can get on with making International women Day about celebrating women and not complaining about the supposed raw deal men get. So I let men know that they do have a day if they want to celebrate themselves. Though not many of them do when it comes along, weirdly.        7.18am GMT    Do women's strikes work?    On 24 October 1975, the women of Iceland did no housework, to protest against their feeble, 5% representation in parliament. They technically went on everything-strike, but since their democratic exclusion was mirrored in the workplace, this functionally meant they stopped looking after their children and doing the washing-up (those who did have jobs worked in schools and nurseries, so those had to close as well). A staggering 90% of women took part, after the genius move of renaming it, not a strike, but a women Day Off, dressing up stridency as me-time. Men had to take their children to work, which gave the event its other name: The Long Friday. This action changed the face of Icelandic politics, delivering to Europe its first female president, Vigds Finnbogadttir, five years later. But its significance in the wider feminist landscape is subtler, since that tension of where you situate domestic labour in the fight for equality is, if anything, more pronounced now than it was then. Feminism at home sounds a lot like nagging. The strike was underpinned by a movement, the radical Red Stockings in Iceland, and sister organisations across Europe making the case for paid housework. We now broadly reject domestic responsibilities as innately female, so would struggle to galvanise action around them. Yet we still do most of them (statistically, I mean; I dont personally, I am a slut) and they are still unpaid. I struggle to see much victory in this turn of events. If you want victory, go to Poland: The so-called Black Protest last October, feminist activist Katarzyna Bielinska tells me, was provoked by an attempt to tighten already the extremely restrictive abortion law in Poland by introducing an even more barbarian bill, banning abortion totally, making a women who aborts liable for five years imprisonment, criminalising miscarriage and blocking prenatal foetus investigation and treatment. Tens of thousands of women went on strike, or  this detail pleases me  went to work but dressed in black, and didnt do anything. More than 140 cities, towns and municipalities were profoundly affected, especially public-sector work. The success was huge and unexpected, Bielinska says. The governing Law and Justice party rejected the bill three days after.   Related: Sex bans, strength and solidarity: women strikes through the ages      Updated at 7.19am GMT     7.06am GMT       Today is on course to be one of the most political International women Days in history, Alexandra Topping and Molly Redden report:  From Thailand to Poland, the United States to Australia, the first Global women Strike will see action on both the industrial and domestic fronts, with participants keen to show solidarity with an energised global women movement. We are united, we are international  and we are everywhere, said Klementyna Suchanow, a Poland-based organiser of the Global women Strike, adding that the walkout would put governments and institutions under pressure by giving women a voice that has long been ignored. We are an army of women across the globe and we are no longer asking to be listened to. The world is being forced to listen to us.    s Day.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"682\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A rally today in Seoul, South Korea, to mark International women Day. Photograph: Jeon Heon-Kyun/EPA     The theme for 2017s International women Day  which celebrates the social, economic, cultural and political achievements of women  is #BeBoldForChange. Organisers of the Global women Strike have joined forces with coordinators of the women March and hundreds of human rights and women campaigners to capitalise on momentum in the movement in the wake of Donald Trumps election. Up to 2 million people around the world marched for equality in January the day after his inauguration. The women March  which now has organisers across 200 cities in 80 countries  has called on supporters not to engage in paid or unpaid labour and only spend money in small and female-owned businesses. Recognising that the poor financial situation and rigid work laws mean many will not be able to take part in a physical strike, organisers are urging supporters to wear red, a colour historically associated with the labour movement, in solidarity. In other countries women will wear black, or different colours, while the focus on issues from femicide to abortion will be decided in each nation.    Related: 'We are international, we are everywhere': women unite in global strike         6.55am GMT          A statue of a girl facing the Wall St Bull. Photograph: Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters    The relationship between feminism and capitalism is a twisty one, but in the US Wall Street is making its own International women Day statement with this statue of a girl facing down the charging bull. Reuters reports:  Placing the diminutive, school-aged girl in front of the massive bull on the eve of International women Day was a way of calling attention to the lack of gender diversity on corporate boards and the pay gap of women working in financial services, a spokeswomen for Wall Street firm State Street Global Advisors said. A lot of people talk about gender diversity, but we really felt we had to take it to a broader level, said Anne McNally. Although women have made some headway against the glass ceiling, State Street said one out of four of the companies that make up the Russell 3000 Index still have no female representation on their boards. The little bronze girl by artist Kristen Visbal was put up in the wee hours of the morning as guerilla art, McNally said. But the firm discussed it with the city beforehand so that it could remain at least temporarily. Were actively pursuing that it stays for a month, she said. If the city decides that it should stay in perpetuity, were absolutely on board with that.     Updated at 6.58am GMT     6.45am GMT    IWD in Greece    In Greece, the Eurozones weakest member state, the governing left-wing Syriza party has issued a rousing statement to mark International women Day. After eight years of economic crisis and depression-era poverty, the ruling Syriza party elected to mark the day tapping into the radical rhetoric that first swept it to power. Women, it said, were not only poorer wherever they lived, they were paid less than men for the same work, while the violence often perpetuated against them was the most widespread crime in the world and harmed the life, dignity and freedom of half the worlds population. Applauding the protest action women had taken over the past year, from the squares of Argentina to those in European cities and Turkey, women, it said, had marched against gender violence, racism, sexism, Donald Trumps misogynist agenda and the policies and effects of austerity.  The 8th of March is a reminder that in our country female unemployment, especially among the young, has soared. The shrinking of the social state brought about by the politics of austerity over the last decade has further encumbered women regarding care for children and old people.  Under the stewardship of Greeces first ever leftist government, legislation outlining the equality of the sexes had been drafted and would soon be put to parliament and sexist language removed from all public documents, it added. Less than 19% of the 300-seat Greek parliament is represented by female MPs.     A demonstration highlighting violence against women in Athens last year. Photograph: GeorgePanagakis/Pacific/Barcroft         6.32am GMT    IWD in Afghanistan    In Afghanistan, Reporters Without Borders says it will today hold an opening ceremony for the countrys first Centre for the Protection of Afghan Women Journalists, in Kabul. Afghan journalist Farida Nikzad will head the new centre, which says its aim is to assist and protect women journalists, especially those working in remote parts of Afghanistan, who are more vulnerable. Nikzad explains:  The creation of this centre is intended to send a strong message not only to Afghan women journalists, but also to all of the countrys women. We want to support women journalists both in war zones and within the news organisations for which they work, to defend both their rights and their physical safety. To that end, we need the government and media owners to commit to do their part in what is a key battle for Afghan society.  The centre says it is already working with 10 female journalists, five of them in conflict zones. Reporters Without Borders says many women have been forced to give up work in the media due to violence:  In some regions, there are no longer any women journalists at all. Three of the 10 journalists and media workers killed in 2016 were women. Thirteen women journalists and media workers (including five foreigners) have been killed since 2001, and at least 10 have had to flee the country. Afghanistan is ranked 120th out of 180 countries in RSFs 2016 World Press Freedom Index.        6.20am GMT       Today is International women Day. There is much to celebrate when it comes to progress for women throughout the world. There is also much to lament, both in relation to what still needs to be done and where the gains we have made risk going backwards. Stillbirth, however, is standing still. The incidence of stillbirth is the same today as it has been for decades. Very little money or attention goes into research to reduce or prevent stillbirth. Why? Stillbirth struggles on two fronts. One, stillbirth is a thing that happens inside a womens body. In a male-dominated world, stillbirth is easily relegated as a private tragedy rather than as a public health matter. Two, stillbirth is not a cause feminists want to champion. Even though stillbirth is a tragedy for thousands of women each year, most feminists dont want to talk about the death of a baby inside its mothers womb. Many feminists get uneasy about anything that gets a bit too close to abortion rights. So lets be clear: stillbirth happens to women who want to be mothers, who have chosen to take a baby to term. It has nothing to do with abortion. Many mothers of stillborn babies are pro-choice and would not seek to restrict women access to abortion services. If feminists believe women choices should be respected, then there is nothing to fear from recognising a womens choice to be a mother. There is everything to gain from demanding that society take seriously a public health problem that devastates six women and their babies a day in Australia.   Related: The incidence of stillbirth hasn't changed in decades. We need to talk about why | Kristina Keneally         6.14am GMT       Found a hidden feminist book? Do let us know where and what!    From midnight NYC time, book fairies around the WORLD will start hiding feminist books to mark #IWD #IWDoursharedshelf @the_bookfairies &mdash; Emma Watson (@EmmaWatson) March 8, 2017         6.04am GMT    Australia's childcare workers strike    Its estimated more than 1,000 early years workers walked off the job today at 3.20pm  the time that women in Australia effectively start working for free.   s Day.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"667\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A protest by childcare workers and their supporters in Sydney on International women Day. Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP    Early childhood educator Julie Lofts said she wanted the government to recognise the value of her work. After 18 years in the industry, she said she continued to live paycheque to paycheque, and had struggled to raise two sons balancing bills and some quality of life. I should be paid a lot more than what I get now, she said. I dont do this for the money, I do it because its a job that I love. But Im not paid according to my qualifications. Carley Adams, an educator at the same centre, had been shocked to discover how little she would earn when she joined the sector six years ago. Its my career, its not just a job I come to every day  When you find something you love to do its hard to leave it, but if I dont get a pay rise I would have to leave eventually, which is sad.    Updated at 6.05am GMT     5.47am GMT       Indias minister for women has sparked anger and ridicule after saying female students need curfews to protect them from their own hormonal outbursts. AFP reports:  Many Indian universities inflict curfews on women while allowing their male students freedom to stay out at night, a policy that critics say is sexist and outdated. Asked about the practice on the NDTV news channel, Manekha Gandhi said it was necessary to protect young women from their own hormones. To protect you from your own hormonal outbursts, perhaps a certain protection, a Lakshman Rekha [red line] is drawn, she said. You can make it [the curfew] six, seven or eight, that depends on college to college but it really is for your own safety, she told the studio audience of college students during a special show to mark International women Day. Gandhi said a similar deadline should be put in place for male students, but many social media users ridiculed her for her comments. You know what would be safest? Lock hormonal men in, instead of denying women the right to lead a full life, tweeted one critic. Gandhi, who is the sister-in-law of opposition leader Sonia Gandhi, is no stranger to controversy. Last year she angered women rights campaigners arguing for a law against marital rape by saying that could not apply in India because society viewed marriage as sacrosanct. In 2015, female students in Delhi launched a campaign against the curfews under the name Pinjra Tod (Break the Cage). University residences generally justify the rules with concern for the safety of young women in a country where sexual violence is widespread.        5.33am GMT       A flicker of controversy from the US, where the lights have gone out on the Statue of Liberty. Was Lady Liberty joining the Day Without Women and showing her support for the global IWD strike? Plenty on social media seemed to think so.    The lights appear to have gone out at the Statue of Liberty...aside from the crown &amp; torch. No word yet on what caused the outage.NA-157TU pic.twitter.com/4o4sDu8s8a&mdash; CNN Newsource (@CNNNewsource) March 8, 2017    Sadly, the reason turned out to be rather more mundane:    Some lights on the Statue were temporarily off tonight.  Likely related to new emergency generator/Hurricane Sandy recovery project work.&mdash; Statue of Liberty NM (@StatueEllisNPS) March 8, 2017      Updated at 5.36am GMT     5.27am GMT    IWD in Myanmar    As our Southeast Asia correspondent Oliver Holmes reports, the forced marriage of women and girls from Myanmar into China has been highlighted today by the Freedom Fund, a private philanthropic initiative dedicated to ending slavery. The organisations CEO, Nick Grono, has been travelling around Myanmar during the past few days and sends this report:  Chinas one-child policy, and the preference of parents for boys, means that by 2025-2030, an estimated 22 to 30 million Chinese men will be unable to find women to marry. This is creating a huge demand for foreign wives. We heard devastating stories from women who have returned from China. One told us how she travelled to what she thought was a well-paying job in the north of Myanmar, only to be sold into marriage in China. She was trapped near Beijing for seven years, and had two daughters with her husband, only to then be deported by Chinese police to Myanmar. She has not had contact with her daughters since then. Another told us how she was deceived by a friend (who turned out to be a marriage broker) to travel to the border with China. There she was sold to a Chinese man for US$9,300. When she did not become pregnant within seven months, this man sold her to another Chinese man for $11,500. She was trapped in that marriage for three years before her family and Myanmar police managed to secure her release. We heard many other equally heart-wrenching stories.  Grono has met with Myanmar officials in the capital, Naypyitaw, and says there is a genuine willingness by the authorities to fight forced marriage. He said the Freedom Fund has a strategy ready and hopes to establish a presence in the country.       5.11am GMT    IWD in Pakistan    Zehra Khan has much to celebrate on International women Day. It is exactly four months since members of the Home-Based Women Workers Federation (HBWWF) in Sindh province in Pakistan  of which Khan is secretary general  finally received legal recognition. The provinces chief minister, Syed Murad Ali Shah, signed a policy that means the regions estimated 5 million home-based workers  the majority of whom are women  can register as workers and access benefits. It was an important day not only for the history of the labour movement in Sindh and Pakistan, but also for south Asia, says Khan, whose federation has more than 4,500 members. Once they are legally accepted as workers, they can be registered with the government-run social security institution, [and] be part of [the] workers welfare board to enjoy benefits like health, education and housing, as well as those offered after retirement, she adds. Almost 80% of an estimated 12 million Pakistani home-based workers are women. As well as unpaid domestic work, the women often spend up to 10 hours a day making garments, footwear, sports goods, and arts and crafts behind closed doors. Their work is often invisible to the rest of the world, despite having propped up the countrys informal economy for so long. They are left to negotiate with the middlemen. Many often get deprived of payment or chastised if they demand better wages, says Khan. The new government policy, however, brings hope that this kind of exploitation will soon come to an end. Once registered as workers, the women will be able to demand a basic level of pay as set out in the Minimum Wages Act of 2015.   Related: International women Day: Pakistans invisible female workers celebrate new legal status | Zofeen Ebrahim         4.59am GMT       Raising a few eyebrows in Australia today is this IWD tribute by Liberal senator Eric Abetz, who has taken to Facebook (retweeted here by Labor MP Tony Burke) to praise Queen Elizabeth II. Fair enough, to a point: plenty of people would applaud her role in public life. As an example of where hard work and commitment can get you in life, the logic goes a little astray. But the most jarring note is surely that dismissal of demanding that people  artificially promote you simply because of your sex. If Elizabeth had had a brother  even a younger one  she would not have been entitled to that throne at all, of course.    Beyond satire... #iwd #auspol #IHaveNoWordsLeft pic.twitter.com/xWkkG8lCfd&mdash; Tony Burke (@Tony_Burke) March 8, 2017      Updated at 5.01am GMT     4.43am GMT       In Australia, more than 1,000 early childhood educators have walked off the job to campaign for equal pay in the pink-collar sector. Dozens of childcare centres closed mid-afternoon on International women Day, said to be the largest action taken by the sector in Australia. The national gender pay gap in Australia is 16.2%, but female-dominated industries attract lower wages than those made up of mostly men. The childcare sector is 97% women but qualified early childhood educators earn some of the lowest wages in the country  as little as $20.61 an hour, or about half the national average wage. It was estimated more than walked off the job at 3.20pm  the time that women in Australia effectively start working for free.  Helen Gibbons, the assistant national secretary of the early childhood union United Voice, said participating educators had worked closely with parents over a matter of weeks to ensure they would not be inconvenienced by the industrial action. Weve been really excited and pleased to see that a lot of parents are really supportive of this campaign and in fact many parents will be joining the educators when theyre walking off the job this afternoon.   Related: More than 1,000 childcare workers walk off job over pay gap         4.30am GMT       India has launched its first all-women cricket league to promote women cricket. The sport, which enjoys enormous popularity in India, has been dominated by men for decades. Founders say the want a women league that enjoys the same prestige as the male Indian Premier League, which has drawn cricket stars from around the world and has huge sponsorship from multinational companies and celebrities. In a statement, founder Parul Jain said, Its important that young girls coming through can see cricket as a viable option to play at the highest level. The WCL #T20 League is expected to be of the same repute as the Indian Premier League (IPL) and women Big Bash League of Australia in support of women. This will lead to greater interest in women cricket in India, which has generally been given much less importance than the mens sport. With many sports getting their own professional leagues and ever-growing popularity in the country, it is time that the women cricket league is formed. It is no surprise that the fierce team of eves does not get as much attention and opportunities neither from the sports bodies or the sponsors in India as the mens team, he said. Founders say India has hundreds of millions of women cricket fans, but few opportunities to play the sport at a professional level. The league will encourage women competitors, who are often discouraged from playing sports, especially in more conservative parts of the country. Sunita Sharma, the countrys first female cricket coach, who is closely associated with the project said, Its been more than three decades since the Indian women cricket team has been formed and has won various matches globally, still there is hardly any acknowledgement to women as per men cricketers in India.   s Harmanpreet Kaur, left, and Rajeshwari Gayakwad celebrate after defeating South Africa in the women world cup qualifier final one-day international cricket match in Colombo in February.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"711\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Indias Harmanpreet Kaur, left, and Rajeshwari Gayakwad celebrate after defeating South Africa in the women world cup qualifier final one-day international cricket match in Colombo in February. Photograph: Eranga Jayawardena/AP         4.16am GMT       An Australian women is running 3,000km across 184 countries in support of rape survivors following her own personal attack, Oliver Holmes reports.  Claire McFarlane began the campaign, named Footsteps to Inspire, in July last year in what she hopes will remove the taboo around rape, support the healing process and ultimately make lasting change. In 1999, I was brutally raped and left for dead on the streets of Paris, McFarlane said in an email to the Guardian. What followed was an arduous, long battle to find justice and it only came to an end in October 2015. Through sharing my own story of survival, Ive become an advocate for survivors of rape. McFarlane will run 16km in each country to signify the 16 years it took for her case against a perpetrator to go through the court system. She has started raising donations for her run, which has taken her from South Africa to India to Papua New Guinea. It will take four years to complete, with McFarlane moving country every week. She ran most recently in Singapore and landed in the Philippines on Monday night. Her next run is on Saturday on the west coast of Luzon, in an area called Zambales.     Leaving footprints of change! 25+ people joined me for the run in Phuket on 3/12.#BReAkthesilence#rape pic.twitter.com/MuqhcoYfH6&mdash; Claire McFarlane (@Project_BRA) December 8, 2016     McFarlane says she is using beach running as a way to tackle the issue of rape in an empowering way. Ive chosen to use a very different medium to talk about rape: that is, adventure and sport. Sport unites us and often brings people together to make a stand for something they believe in, she said. Funds raised for the cause are donated to local projects or organisations helping rape survivors as well as part of the cost of the trip, in which McFarlane meets with NGOs working to combat sexual violence. McFarlane will also collect data on survivors of sexual violence in all 184 nations, which she will compile for a research report.        4.02am GMT       Some readers have been in touch to let me know what they have been, or will be, doing to mark International women Day. Do feel free to contact me on Twitter @Claire_Phipps, or via the comments below.    @Claire_Phipps #internationalwomenday Be Bold for Change Wellington NZ pic.twitter.com/Wg2xdXSqcP&mdash; Em nee Snowflake (@EmNeeSnowflake) March 8, 2017      Tomorrow in Rome | 5pm Colosseum  @Claire_Phipps @RomeWomen #LottoMarzo #nonunadimeno #daywithoutawomen #strike pic.twitter.com/vytXxgjtix&mdash; Elizabeth Geoghegan (@ElizGeo) March 7, 2017         3.54am GMT       There was more unwelcome news for Japan ahead of International women Day, reports Justin McCurry from Tokyo, with the release of a report showing that the country ranks 163rd out of 193 countries in female representation in lower houses of parliament.  The defence minister, Tomomi Inada; the leader of the biggest opposition party, Renho Murata; and the governor of Tokyo, Yuriko Koike, are all women, but Japan trails behind all of its G7 counterparts in overall political representation, according to the Inter-Parliamentary Union. The report, released on Wednesday, did note, however, that a record 28 women were elected to Japans upper house last July. Koike, who has criticised the golf venue for the 2020 Tokyo Olympics over its sexist membership policy, is aiming to put a dent in male domination of politics, at least at the local level, by securing a female majority in city assembly elections this July. Since I am the governor of this mega-city and hopefully the assembly will have a female majority, that will be a big change, Koike said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. Selecting as many women politicians as possible in the local assembly will surely make Tokyo change.      Tokyo governor Yuriko Koike. Photograph: Behrouz Mehri/AFP/Getty Images         3.38am GMT    IWD in Canberra  and Kenya    In Australias capital, the National Press Club hosted Kenyan educator and social activist Kakenya Ntaiya to mark International women Day. Ntaiya is the founder of the Kakenya Centre for Excellence, a boarding school for girls in Enoosaen. The centre requires as a condition of enrolment that girls are not subjected to genital mutilation or forced marriage.    Listening to Kakenya Ntaiya @PressClubAust #IWD @Claire_Phipps pic.twitter.com/FljVoHu9db&mdash; Katharine Murphy (@murpharoo) March 8, 2017    Ntaiya told the story of bargaining for her education at the age of seven, when she told her father she would submit to female genital mutilation if he would allow her to complete her education:  I went through the cuts and it was a very horrifying experience. There is no anaesthesia when its done, there is no medication, I bled, I fainted after that. Im very lucky that Im standing here today sharing my story. Many girls die. I was determined. I went back to school.  She finished her education, won a scholarship to an American university (which involved another round of bargaining with the powerful men of her small Kenyan village), completed a PhD, and in the course of her studies, decided she would open a school in her village for 10 girls  I arrived there and 100 girls showed up. It was not just the girls, it was their parents, it was their grandmothers, it was the people who really thirsted for an education. So my ten became 30. I have dreamed big. My girls are graduating this year. This year, 26 of them are finishing high school. They are going to university: this is the first time in my village that we are going to be sending 26 girls  not one women, but 26 of them. That is the future of Kenya. Think about those girls. Some of them you might meet some day. Think about them as heads of banks. Think of them  thats their dream. They want to be doctors. Think about them as lawyers. Think about them making change in the whole world. Thats why we stand here today to celebrate the progress we have made, by pushing ourselves to be bold, to move forward, to say its time that women need to be there. Please dont wait to be handed over. We have to step forward. We have to be bold.     Updated at 3.38am GMT     3.27am GMT       On Monday night, on Australias Q&amp;A debate show, Mei Fong, a journalist and author of a book on Chinas one-child policy, now based in Washington DC, said the ability to protest was a great privilege. Fong praised the regular protests in Americas capital, the heart of crazy Trumpland, adding:  It is protests against the immigration ban, against mistreatment of women, and I bless my heart  its so wonderful when I see people chant, holding up signs in the streets. You guys dont realise how wonderful it is to be able to get out there and not be tear-gassed.        3.20am GMT       Two years ago, Li Maizi was imprisoned after she and four other young feminists attempted to mark International women Day in China. This year Li is spending International women Day in the UK where she spoke at Soas in London last night and will address the University of Nottingham tonight. She has also written for the Guardian about her treatment  and the treatment of women  in her home country:   I often think of the day I was detained in Beijing. On the night of 6 March 2015, the police knocked on my door and took me to the station, where I was questioned nonstop for 24 hours. Later I was sent to a detention centre, where I was held for 37 days  Two years later, is there any hope for the Chinese feminist movement? Definitely, yes. Since my arrest, there has been both progress and a backlash against women rights  Women are becoming more active in the fight against gender discrimination. When I was released from detention, I faced a tough decision: should I continue my activism, or give up? I chose to continue. What I do is for the rights of women all over the world. But I cant help but be especially concerned about China. My own experiences, and the experiences of my friends in China, have had a profound effect on me  Because of Chinas two-child policy, abortions are readily available. If you get pregnant with a third child, abortion is compulsory. But I dont see our free access to abortion as a sign of progress, as reproductive rights only apply to married women. If you are unmarried, it is illegal to give birth and you will face heavy fines. Some NGOs are calling on the government to grant single women their reproductive rights.    Related: I went to jail for handing out feminist stickers in China | Li Maizi      Updated at 3.28am GMT     3.05am GMT       Maxine Beneba Clarke, Emily Maguire and two recently deceased authors, Georgia Blain and Cory Taylor, are among six authors shortlisted for the 2016 Stella prize, celebrating female writers in Australia. The shortlisted books, announced on International women Day, are Between a Wolf and a Dog by Georgia Blain; The Hate Race by Maxine Beneba Clarke; Poum and Alexandre by Catherine de Saint Phalle; An Isolated Incident by Emily Maguire; The Museum of Modern Love by Heather Rose; and Dying: A Memoir by Cory Taylor. The 2017 Stella prize shortlist celebrates books that combine extraordinary literary accomplishment with the social and familial reverberations of some of the most significant issues of our time: racism, violence against women, the aftermath of totalitarianism, the place of art in everyday life and the way we confront our individual mortality, said Brenda Walker, the chair of the judging panel.   Related: Stella prize 2016 announces shortlist of six books by Australian women         2.57am GMT       Staff at Australias Fairfax media are holding a Fairfax Sausage Fest to highlight the 23.2% pay gap in newspaper publishing. Journalists are donning their vintage finery  retro-grade dress up day  to tell management to stop living in the past and make women equal to men in terms of pay.    Retro(grade) dressups at the Age on #IWD2017 to protest the media gender pay gap. #femalejournos #dressyourpaygap #meaa #equalpay pic.twitter.com/mtPwgj4CK3&mdash; Miki Perkins (@perkinsmiki) March 7, 2017         2.47am GMT    IWD in South Korea    Justin McCurry reports:  The Korean women Association United is holding its annual Korean women Conference in Seoul today. The association says it is working for the realisation of a democracy where everyone can enjoy equal basic citizenship rights regardless of gender, sexual orientation, origin or class. Despite the rapid economic growth South Korea has enjoyed since the end of the Korean war in 1953, the countrys women still earn far less than their male counterparts. According to the Women In Work Index 2017 released by PricewaterhouseCoopers last month, the gender pay gap in South Korea was 36%, more than twice the average of 16 percent among OECD countries. That means South Korean women are, on average, paid 36% less than their male counterparts. The report said that if current pay trends persist, South Korean women will have to wait more than a century before their wages catch up with those of men, according to the Yonhap news agency.   South Korea elected its first female president in late 2012  the now-impeached Park Geun-hye - but gender disparity reigns in the countrys national assembly, where just 17% of the the 300 members are women, according to a recent study. That is still the highest proportion of seats held by women in the assemblys history.        2.25am GMT    IWD in India    Over 30 women organisations in India will march in New Delhi today for the One Billion Rising march. The campaign started five years ago, on Valentines day, and spread across 207 countries, as women marched together to end rape and sexual violence against women. In Delhi the march had a particular significance, as the city was still reeling after the horrific gang rape and murder of medical student Jyoti Singh. In 2012, after the details of Singhs case emerged, India burst into protest, with candlelight vigils, and protests across the country. The case paved the way for small victories, including a special court to fast-track rape cases in the country, and a greater awareness of the countrys ingrained culture of violence against women. This year, One Billion Risings campaigns are focusing on ending the exploitation of women. More than 1,000 women are expected to gather at the Rajiv Chowk metro station around 11am local time. After the demonstration, a forum to discuss the work of various women organisations will be held.   s Day.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Indian students at a college in Chennai ahead of International women Day. Photograph: Arun Sankar/AFP/Getty Images      Updated at 2.25am GMT     2.17am GMT       In Australia, Dr Mehreen Faruqi, an MP with Greens NSW and a high-profile campaigner for access to abortion, began International women Day with a breakfast for a few hundred women at NSW Parliament House. She became the first Muslim women to join an Australian parliament in 2013, benefiting from the Greens affirmative action policy in a seat that had been preselected for women. She said it concerned her that the Australian parliaments upper house had the lowest percentage of women of any in Australia:  That really boggles my mind, I have to say. And being a women of colour, theres hardly any diversity. Thats kind of a challenge as you do feel a little bit lonely, in that space.  She understood why a career in politics would not appeal to women, given both the isolation and the adversarial environment:  You wouldnt believe how many women have said, good on you Mehreen, but I cant do it.  Other parties needed to take serious action to make sure women were selected for winnable spots, said Faruqi. Faruqi recently came under fire for her comments that there was systemic racism in Australia; a Liberal upper house MP said it was evidence that the Greens secretly loathe this wonderful country. She said, especially in the context of Australias history, it was undeniable that there had been racism, though she loved it as she did Pakistan, her birth country. When she arrived in Australia she was made to feel quite welcome, she said, but that had changed in the last 10 to 15 years:  The amount of racism and sexism women are facing, especially women of colour and Muslim women and those that wear a hijab that are easy to identify  I dont want us to go that way. I want us to be the best country possible, and that is respectful, multicultural and inclusive. But the first step towards that is to actually acknowledge that racism exists.        1.56am GMT    IWD in Japan    Tokyo will host a women march from 3pm local time today, Justin McCurry reports from Japan. We have been inspired by the women marches which took place around the world [in January], and with the wish to walk together on International women Day, decided to plan the following event and march, the organisers said on the events Facebook page. Japans prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has had limited success in his womenomics campaign to raise the profile of women in the workforce, a measure he says will boost economic growth and address the countrys greying working-age population.While the proportion of working-age Japanese women with jobs has increased  at 66.7%, the rate is on a par with the US  many do poorly paid part-time or temporary jobs that critics say are contributing to a rise in poverty levels in the worlds third-biggest economy. Although women are notoriously under-represented in Japanese boardrooms, the countrys powerful  and male-dominated  business lobby, Keidanren, has just sent an all-female business lobby to the US, led by BT Japan president Haruno Yoshida.       1.42am GMT    IWD in Indonesia    In Indonesia, a coalition of women right groups will be staging a march from central Jakarta to the presidential palace to mark International women Day. Once in front of the palace, a diverse range of speakers will address the crowd, including female migrant workers  a group often subject to exploitation and abuse in the Middle East and across the region  as well as fisherwomen, female farmers and labourers, and victims of the recent and controversial riverside evictions in the capital. There will also be theatre and music performances, as well as a dance performance by transgender students. Organisers from the IWD action committee expect a turnout of around 2,000 people.   s march in Jakarta this week ahead of International women Day celebrations.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"666\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A women march in Jakarta this week ahead of International women Day celebrations. Photograph: Afriadi Hikmal / Barcroft Images    The event follows a successful turnout for a planned women march just a few days ago, where hundreds dressed in pink and purple and took to the streets to demand equal rights for women. Several Indonesian women dressed in blood-stained kebayas, traditional Javanese blouses, led the march holding signs that showed how many women are victims of sexual abuse and are killed in fatal assaults each year. Initially inspired by the feminist movement that swept America after the election of Donald Trump, the Jakarta march on Saturday gave voice to the state of women rights in Indonesia  a country where over recent years aspiring female police officers have been subject to virginity tests, and where FGM remains widespread.    Updated at 1.50am GMT     1.24am GMT    IWD in Papua New Guinea    Papua New Guinea has for some time been considered one of the most dangerous places in the world to be a women or child. Rates of family and sexual violence are at epidemic levels, but many organisations  at community, government, and international levels  have worked hard to address it. Ume Wainetti is the long-term coordinator of the PNG family and sexual violence action committee, and she says there have been great changes  hindered by a lack of follow-through and real support from the government. She tells the Guardian:  At the end of last year we passed the [government] strategy on family and sexual violence, but we dont know if funding will be made available to implement it. We are screaming and shouting for things to be done but what support is being given for it is another matter. There is government support but no financial commitment.  The fear of stigma and retribution continues to stop many women in violent relationships from seeking protection or assistance, Wainetti says, and there is a lack of services beyond the provincial level. About 85% of Papua New Guineans live in rural areas.     A 2016 PNG campaign to raise awareness on ending violence against women. Photograph: Johaness Terra/UN Women    However, Wainetti says there have been changes in community awareness, not just about the unacceptable levels of violence but also the place of women in the upper levels of leadership. The country goes to a national election in June. Im here at a meeting where 50 women are attending training, learning  if they win  how they will do in parliament and what is expected of them, says Wainetti. I have not really seen many women confirmed candidates. At the last election, there were three and she hopes 2017 will see more. Whether they have funding or party support to make it to parliament is another matter. There are changes but we still need to see some concrete support. Some of that support comes from international NGOs like MSF, ChildFund, and the Red Cross, as well as foreign governments. This morning Australias foreign minister, Julie Bishop, who is currently in PNG, announced AU$10m in grants to six international NGOs to deliver projects promoting the rights of women and girls in 12 developing countries, including PNG. Bishop said the Gender Action Platform projects work to increase women economic opportunities, improve women participation in leadership, and reduce gender-based violence.    Updated at 1.50am GMT     1.06am GMT       Writing in Guardian Australia today, Greens NSW MP Mehreen Faruqi says the right for women to control their bodies is still under attack in Australia  not least by the continuing restrictions on access to abortion:   So many people are shocked to discover that abortion is still a criminal offence in both Queensland and New South Wales. While medical practice has advanced and majority public opinion has shifted in support of a womens right to choose, more than century-old laws remain unaltered in these two states  Many doctors do not perform this procedure owing to this risk of prosecution. Services are limited, privatised and expensive, creating barriers to access, especially for rural and regional women. Its not unusual to see intimidation of patients by anti-choice protesters picketing outside clinics with graphic images and even handing out plastic foetuses in an effort to shame them. This is what criminalisation has led to: shame and stigma. We must remove the shame and end the stigma.    Related: Abortion must be decriminalised in Australia: we cant take our reproductive rights for granted | Mehreen Faruqi         12.49am GMT       Todays Google doodle for IWD highlights the lives of 13 women, as told by a women to her granddaughter as a bedtime story. All of the women featured, Google says, have previously featured in doodles of their own, but usually only within their home countries. The doodle shows the stories of American suffragist Ida Wells; Egyptian pilot Lotfia El Nadi; Mexican artist Frida Kahlo; Italian-born Brazilian architect Lina Bo Bardi; Soviet scientist Olga Skorokhodova; South African activist Miriam Makeba; American astronaut Sally Ride; the first Muslim women to compete in the Olympics, Turkeys Halet ambel; English computer pioneer Ada Lovelace; Indian dancer Rukmini Devi; Argentinian doctor Cecilia Grierson; Koreas first female lawyer and judge Lee Tai-young; and French tennis player Suzanne Lenglen.         IWD 2017 Google doodle.      Updated at 12.49am GMT     12.28am GMT       ABC News presenter Juanita Phillips has some advice for those perturbed by the Australian broadcasters all-female line-up today:    If the ABC&#39;s all women day makes you angry or uncomfortable, reflect on why. That&#39;s the point. And relax, it&#39;s only one day. Happy #IWD2017&mdash; Juanita Phillips (@Juanita_Phillip) March 7, 2017         12.17am GMT    IWD in China    China  home to around 675 million women  is unlikely to witness much IWD action today. Two years ago, five feminists who were planning to put some stickers on buses to mark International women Day were locked up by authorities on suspicion of picking quarrels and creating a disturbance. The women  Wei Tingting, Li Tingting (known as Li Maizi), Wu Rongrong, Wang Man and Zheng Churan (Datu)  were intending to distribute stickers with slogans such as Police: go arrest those who committed sexual harassment.     Li Maizi, a Chinese feminist, protests against Sina Weibo. Photograph: Li Maizi    Just a fortnight ago, an account called Feminist Voice in China on social networking site Sina Weibo was banned for 30 days after it posted a Chinese translation of an article in which academics argued for a new militant feminist struggle against Donald Trumps policies, calling for an international women strike today, 8 March. The article was first published in the Guardian: you can read it here. Xiong Jing, an editor for the Feminist Voice, said Weibo had not told the group the reason for the ban, but:  We are guessing that its because we sent out some tweets calling for a women strike action against Trump.     Updated at 3.25am GMT     12.02am GMT    How Australian media covers IWD    All day today across TV, radio and digital, Australias ABC is celebrating International women Day with an all-female line-up. Women will take over from their male counterparts on programs they host from NewsRadio to ABC TV. News bulletins across the country and television programs will focus on telling women stories.In a special IWD broadcast at 1pm, Radio National will revisit its groundbreaking women show Coming Out with a special Coming Out, Again, which will reunite some of the Coming Out cast from the 70s to the 90s, such as Julie Rigg, Nicola Joseph, Fiona Martin and Kath Duncan. Mark Colvins PM will instead be hosted by Kim Landers and Julia Zemiros Home Delivery features social commentator Susan Carland. On ABC iview you can watch a collection of programs highlighting the work of women including artist Margaret Olley, journalist Ita Buttrose and comedian Judith Lucy. But Rupert Murdochs stable was cranky with the ABC for devoting the day to celebrating women. A front page in the Daily Telegraph yesterday called it tokenism and a man ban. The ABC will boot all of its male television and radio hosts off air tomorrow in a bizarre and patronising bid to promote gender equality, the Tele reported. The Australian soon jumped on the bandwagon, with not one but two pieces ridiculing the move: The ABC in its wisdom is dumping its male presenters tomorrow in favour of an all female line-up. The ABC was forced to defend the initiative.  International women Day is an opportunity for the ABC to draw attention to one of the great issues of the modern age. Gender parity is one of the biggest challenges facing the Australian, and the global, economy today. The #IWDABC line-up on International women Day represents one day of activity; however it sits within a broader ABC campaign focusing on equality and the recognition of women, and supporting the UNs #BeBoldForChange initiative.     Thanks to @dailytelegraph for promoting our awesome all-female line-up for International Women&#39;s Day. pic.twitter.com/njHg2qF7dc&mdash; ABC Sydney (@abcsydney) March 7, 2017      Updated at 12.03am GMT     11.52pm GMT       There are a bunch of happenings going on around Southeast Asia for International women Day, reports our correspondent Oliver Holmes. In Singapore, the iconic Vagina Monologues is on. The show started in New York two decades ago and has since been translated into nearly 50 languages to empower women and men, stimulate dialogue and support social causes such as ending violence against women. Tickets are sold out but you can jump on a waiting list here. A portion of the profit will go towards care packages covering food, medicine, sanitary napkins, infant formula and children uniforms for destitute women on the streets of Johor Bahr, in Malaysia. Also in the city state (and not sold out!) there is Queer Karaoke. Its billed as for feminists and pacifists passionate about women issues. Book here. In Myanmar, head to the lush Peoples Park at 4.30pm local for a celebration of art exhibitions, music, theatre and public readings. The organisers say there will be some surprises too. In Thailand, there is the HeForShe arts week Bangkok, run by UN Women and starting today. At the Bangkok Arts and Cultural Centre, there will be exhibits and performances, including from Thai-Australian video artist Kawita Vatanajyankur and Hong Kong-based graphic designer Cath Love. Also in Bangkok, a four-days film festival starts in SF Cinema Central World to showcase seven award-winning movies based on gender issues, including He Named Me Malala and Dev Bhoomi. International women Day talks are being held across the Philippines, too: here and here and here.       11.35pm GMT       A key feature of 2017s International women Day is the call for a day without women  for women to take the day off work (paid and unpaid, at home and out of the home); to avoid shopping for the day, with exceptions for small, women- and minority-owned businesses; to wear red in solidarity. In America, the call to strike has been led by the organisers of the women March, which took place across the US (and the world) the day after Trumps inauguration. A group of feminist activists and academics wrote recently in the Guardian about the need to strike:  The idea is to mobilize women, including trans women, and all who support them in an international day of struggle  a day of striking, marching, blocking roads, bridges, and squares, abstaining from domestic, care and sex work, boycotting, calling out misogynistic politicians and companies, striking in educational institutions. These actions are aimed at making visible the needs and aspirations of those whom lean-in feminism ignored: women in the formal labor market, women working in the sphere of social reproduction and care, and unemployed and precarious working women. In embracing a feminism for the 99%, we take inspiration from the Argentinian coalition Ni Una Menos. Violence against women, as they define it, has many facets: it is domestic violence, but also the violence of the market, of debt, of capitalist property relations, and of the state; the violence of discriminatory policies against lesbian, trans and queer women; the violence of state criminalization of migratory movements; the violence of mass incarceration; and the institutional violence against women bodies through abortion bans and lack of access to free healthcare and free abortion.          video\"            data-video-provider=\"Reuters/AP\"            >    Voices from the women March on Washington    But Guardian columnist Lindy West, speaking on Australian TV this week, while agreeing that protest is most effective when it disrupts peoples lives, echoed concerns of others who are cautious about the proposed strike:  It would be tremendously effective if we could mobilise every single women in the world  A concern for me, as a very privileged, financially stable white women who works from home  its very easy for me to say yes, everyone should go on strike but I want to be very cognisant of the fact there are very many women who cannot afford to lose one days worth of pay, let alone risk their job.  You can find details of strikes and other protests taking place around the world from Australia to Uruguay via the links on this page.    Updated at 7.51am GMT     11.17pm GMT       Today, Margaret Carey  director of an early childhood centre in Sydney, Australia  is striking for the first time ever. She explains why:   Women are an essential part of society. We hold together the household. We hold together the family. We care for our partners (though in a genuine relationship it is certainly not a one-way street). We care for our children. We care for others children. We care for our parents as they grow older. And we fill the jobs equated with caring. In my sector, 97% of us are women. It is not because the work we do has no value. It is because the work we do has an intrinsic female association. Care in any role should not be seen as of little value. If anything, it should be seen as value-adding to the role. Look at aged care workers, educators, nurses, teachers, social workers, psychologists, therapists, tutors, doctors. None of these professions are seen only as caring, but care is understood as intrinsic to their role. But it is we in early childhood who forever need to point out that we are the same: we do caring but our whole job is far more than that. I am walking off because I want the government and society to recognise that an early childhood educator is a professional role and one that must be given its deserved status. The first real step, a big step, in this direction is to receive professional wages, not 20 patronising dollars an hour.    Related: I'm striking for the first time in my life. As an educator, that's a big deal | Margaret Carey         11.08pm GMT       More of the globe is now ticking over into International women Day. Heres Lebanons government palace in Beirut, illuminated purple for the day:   s government palace is seen illuminated purple to mark International women Day in downtown Beirut, Lebanon March 7, 2017. REUTERS/Mohamed Azakir\" width=\"1000\" height=\"667\" class=\"gu-image\" />   In Mumbai, the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus railway station has turned pink:   s Day in Mumbaiepa05834729 An Indian girl stands in front of the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) railway station, lit up in pink colour on the eve of International women Day, in Mumbai, India, 07 February 2017. International women Day is celebrated globally on 08 March to promote women rights and equality. EPA/DIVYAKANT SOLANKI\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />        10.49pm GMT       Whens International Mens Day? Its 19 November, since you ask. If youd like to hear more about how International Mens Day is on 19 November, can I suggest you follow comedian Richard Herring on Twitter, as he endures his annual feat of replying to all the people wondering when International Mens Day is. Heres what Herring wrote for the Guardian on International Mens Day in 2015:   International women Day is on 8 March: 24 hours (of the 8,760 annually available) set aside to celebrate women and all of their achievements. And people get furious about it. Surely, you might think, you could only be cross about it because that definitely isnt enough time to celebrate the achievements of over than 50% of the population. But no  So for the last two International women Days I have tried to highlight this stupidity. I have got up early, logged on to Twitter and searched for the phrase international mens day, found every single person who has tweeted the question and responded to them all individually: Its 19 November. There are thousands to get through. It goes on relentlessly, for hours and hours, but I try to get to them all because to see the same moronic question asked over and over again by people (who dont even think just to check Google to make sure theyre not making an arse of themselves) is very funny, and shows exactly why an international women day is necessary. Incidentally, nobody tweets me back to say: Oh thanks for the information. I was wondering when it was. Almost like they dont want to know the answer to their own question. My hope is that if I can spend a day a year dealing with this issue, then that means that everyone else can get on with making International women Day about celebrating women and not complaining about the supposed raw deal men get. So I let men know that they do have a day if they want to celebrate themselves. Though not many of them do when it comes along, weirdly.     Updated at 7.27am GMT     10.37pm GMT       Incorrect assumptions are still being made that gender equality has been achieved, despite disturbing and comprehensive evidence to the contrary, an investigation by Australias sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, has found. Her findings include the experiences of more than 1,000 women she interviewed while travelling to every state and territory over a six-month period last year to learn about Australias progress towards gender equality.   I witnessed tremendous resilience from women overcoming the entrenched obstacles to their progress.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Kate Jenkins: I witnessed tremendous resilience from women overcoming the entrenched obstacles to their progress. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP    Women working in rural and remote areas were particularly vulnerable to inequality, Jenkins found. One young women told her how she was asked to wear a bikini while fruit picking to get paid a bonus. Jenkins heard stories of women not being taken seriously or experiencing sexual harassment in these areas in particular. A lot of the rural women were really facing greater barriers to women in metro areas, she said.  Its too easy to lump all women together as a homogenous group of white, Anglo-Saxon, heterosexual, able-bodied people, many who feel they are breaking down some of those barriers to equality. But there are many different voices in this, and my voice is tied to having spoken to rural women, LGBTI women, older women, women with disabilities, migrant women and Aboriginal women.  Research shows that women with disabilities are 40% more likely than women without disabilities to be the victims of domestic violence; and that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women are 32 times more likely to be admitted to hospital as a result of family violence-related assault than non-Indigenous women in Australia. The findings were launched today to coincide with international women day. Jenkins said it was distressing to see the same arguments emerge each year that having a day for women was biased against men and unnecessary.   Related: Australian report finds disturbing evidence of gender inequality         10.24pm GMT       Women from more than 40 countries are staging a strike from all work, paid and unpaid, to highlight women power within global economies. But what if you cant join them? Here are other ways you can show solidarity, from wearing red to avoiding the shops for the day.        video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    International women Day: how can you support the global strike?         10.12pm GMT       New Zealand was the first country to give women the vote but gender equality is far from achieved. The pay gap is of particular concern, having remained steady at about 12% for the past decade. On current figures, it will be 45 years before New Zealand women are paid equally. Thats even though the Equal Pay Act was passed in 1972  it has never been enforced. Last month the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions launched the Treat Her Right campaign to lobby the government to take action on the issue of pay inequality.          Why are women still getting paid less than men?    On Tuesday, the Ministry for Women released the findings of the first comprehensive study of the causes of the gender pay gap in New Zealand. It found that hard to measure factors such as conscious and unconscious bias, and differences in choices and behaviours between men and women, accounted for 80% of the difference. For women on higher wages, the pay gap was significant and hard to explain; for women on lower incomes, factors such as type of work, family responsibilities, education and age remained important. In her first major speech since taking on the portfolio of minister for women, Paula Bennett said the difference in pay was really disappointing, and called on her audience  members of the Human Resource Institute of New Zealand  to take steps towards addressing it. She urged employers to remember three things:  Its not about what you can get away with. Its not about what she is willing to accept. Its simply about you paying her what she is worth.        9.59pm GMT       Julia Gillard, former prime minister of Australia and current chair of the board of the Global Partnership for Education, writes today for Guardian Australia about the hidden women of International women Day:   Considering that approximately 130 million girls worldwide are not attending primary through upper-secondary school and that women represent nearly two thirds of the worlds illiterate, we must ask: How many other innovations and inventions  great and small  have been lost to the world because so many minds are idle on the sidelines of human progress?    Related: With great female minds idling on the sidelines, how much progress have we lost? | Julia Gillard         9.45pm GMT       Today is set to be one of the most political International women Days in history, Alexandra Topping and Molly Redden report:   From Thailand to Poland, the United States to Australia, the first Global women Strike will see action on both the industrial and domestic fronts, with participants keen to show solidarity with an energised global women movement. We are united, we are international  and we are everywhere, said Klementyna Suchanow, a Poland-based organiser of the Global women Strike, adding that the walkout would put governments and institutions under pressure by giving women a voice that has long been ignored. We are an army of women across the globe and we are no longer asking to be listened to. The world is being forced to listen to us.      Women in Poland went on strike in October 2016 to fight for entitlement to legal abortion, sex education and contraception. Photograph: Stephanie Lecocq/EPA     The theme for 2017s International women Day  which celebrates the social, economic, cultural and political achievements of women  is #BeBoldForChange. Organisers of the Global women Strike have joined forces with coordinators of the women March and hundreds of human rights and women campaigners to capitalise on momentum in the movement in the wake of Donald Trumps election. Up to 2 million people around the world marched for equality in January the day after his inauguration. The women March  which now has organisers across 200 cities in 80 countries  has called on supporters not to engage in paid or unpaid labour and only spend money in small and female-owned businesses. Recognising that the poor financial situation and rigid work laws mean many will not be able to take part in a physical strike, organisers are urging supporters to wear red, a colour historically associated with the labour movement, in solidarity. In other countries women will wear black, or different colours, while the focus on issues from femicide to abortion will be decided in each nation.    Related: 'We are international, we are everywhere': women unite in global strike         9.33pm GMT    Welcome    Hello from Sydney, where International women Day is up and running (and for readers still in Tuesday time zones: think of this as a bonus preview). Well be covering the full day live from our offices in Sydney, London and New York; and with correspondents chipping in from all over the world. Well be watching out for events, protests and stories of  a day without women, as well as highlighting some of the key (and less key but just really, persistently irritating) issues that continue to thwart and hinder progress towards equality worldwide. Wed also like to hear whats happening where you are  let me know in the comments below or find me on Twitter @Claire_Phipps.    "
"67""Millions of people around the world are marking International women Day, in what campaigners are saying is the most political global event of its kind yet.  Women in more than 50 countries will go on strike from paid and unpaid labour on Wednesday, while many more will be taking part in protests and direct action. In some countries women will wear black, or different colours, while the focus on issues from femicide to abortion will be decided in each nation. The International women Strike is suggesting that women boycott local misogynists, stop shopping, go on a sex strike, block roads and streets, and take part in marches or pickets. Women are also encouraged to leave calls to action in out of office replies, describing why they are striking. However, or wherever, youre marking International women Day wed like you to share your experiences, messages, photographs and videos with us. Click on the blue Contribute button at the top of the live blog and well use a selection of responses in our reporting.  We recognise it may not always be safe to record or share your experiences  so please think about this when sharing your content with GuardianWitness. You can also share your thoughts using the form below. Well make sure to keep your details as safe as possible.      "
"68""After years of operating in the shadows, Russias women rights activists are pushing back against traditional values, and a government that has recently decriminalised some forms of domestic violence.   Related: Fury at Russian move to soften domestic violence law    Last week hundreds of activists marched on city streets to demand equality on International women Day and more than 1,000 attended Fem Fest in Moscow, the first feminist festival of its kind in Russia. Widely perceived as a western concept, feminism has never had much support in Russias patriarchal society  despite the fact that the Soviets were some of the first to give women the vote and legalise abortion. Today, feminists are vilified on social media and in the state-run Russian press. Politicians openly accuse activists of exaggerating existing problems for murky goals, and the media have branded feminism an aggressive movement imposing bizarre lifestyle demands on women. As a result, says Irina Izotova, curator of Fem Fest, most women in Russia distance themselves from feminism. For them, feminists are those who stand on the street with signs, protesting.  With the headline-grabbing protest tactics of Pussy Riot and the Ukrainian group Femen now focusing their efforts elsewhere  Pussy Riot moved on to advocating for political prisoners and Femen is mostly active in Europe  speakers at the festival focused on the day-to-day issues Russian women face. Talks addressed current problems with domestic violence, for which the punishment has just been downgraded despite 35,899 cases being reported in 2015; the disturbing trend of rape victims being blamed for provoking their attackers; and the fact that police dismiss four out of five rape reports.      Punk group and political activists Pussy Riot in 2014. Photograph: Morry Gash/AP    There was a lecture on the gender pay gap, which even state officials admit is at 27%. Others talked about the history of feminism in Russia and how sexually active women are regarded by society as having loose morals. But division was growing in the ranks as the festival approached, with some feminists boycotting the event. In an open letter to the organisers, radical feminist groups and activists accused Fem Fest of depoliticising feminism, making it too glamorous and soft. The festivals programme leaves out the agenda that addresses the most painful issues of Russian life  and makes feminism just a fancy trinket, the open letter on the Colta culture news website read. The letter was also critical of Fem Fest for ignoring politically sensitive issues such as forced marriage and honour killings in the North Caucasus. A Photoshop stunt on International women Day also caused debate after it emerged that a banner reading feminism [is] a national cause on the Kremlin had been faked. Some accused those involved of undermining joint efforts to get society to take feminists seriously. Whatever feminists do [in Russia], it is always regarded as harming feminism, said Leda Garina, one of the organisers of the stunt, adding that their objective was to attract more attention to the cause.  But some see these schisms as encouraging. By participating in these discussions, society is reassessing the role of women and starting to acknowledge the problems, argued the women rights advocate Alyona Popova.   Men have been in power for 200 years. Down with it! and light smoke flares outside the Kremlin on International women Day.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  A banner reading Men have been in power for 200 years. Down with it! outside the Kremlin on International women Day. Another, faked image sparked a row. Photograph: TASS/Getty Images    Kirill Martynov, a philosophy professor at the Higher School of Economics in Moscow, echoed her sentiment. Speaking at the festival, he said:  Feminism is at the top of the agenda in Russia. Its finally out there in society, describing the clashes as growing pains. Others warned that infighting could overshadow the real fight for laws and services that protect women. We still dont have proper domestic violence legislation. We lack anti-discrimination laws that could help fight discrimination against women in courts and not just on paper, said Yuliya Antonova, a women rights lawyer with the NGO Russia Justice Initiative. There are too few crisis centres for women in trouble. A lack of information is one of the most pressing feminist issues in Russia today, adds Antonova, and women need to know how they can protect themselves. The government seems at least to be paying lip service to the issue, too. On International women Day, Russias prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, outlined ambitious goals to reduce the gender pay gap, prevent violence and ensure proper healthcare for women.  But Popova warned that this could be just a strategy to win the female vote in the run-up to the presidential election. After 2018, they might as well say that they have analysed the situation, and it isnt so bad, so no additional steps need to be taken, she says, adding that now is not the time for women rights activists to take their eye off the ball."
"69""Whats next for the women movement(5 March)? Two women are killed every week in England and Wales by abusive partners, yet since 2010, 17% of women refuges in England have shut. In a typical day, 103 children and 155 women are turned away from a refuge because they cant be accommodated; 10% are declined because the refuge is unable to meet their individual needs, such as those with mental health issues or who come from Black, Asian and minority ethnic or lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities who may require specialist support. Theres a lot we can do to help them as women and business organisations. Initiatives that help build self-esteem and develop empowerment are key to helping victims of abuse break out of their situation. The Longleigh Foundation is funding an innovative recovery toolkit programme at South Hampshire women Refuge in Southampton. Over six months this project will help about 15 women, at a cost of 2,300 per candidate.Sue TerryChair, Longleigh Foundation   In the wake of International women Day, the prime minister is attending an EU heads of state summit at which two topics dominate the agenda: Brexit and migration. As agencies assisting refugee women and girls in the UK and around the world, we hope Theresa May takes one message to our European colleagues  that the UK is serious about being a good European citizen when it comes to sharing the responsibility for hosting&#xa0;refugees. This month marks the anniversary of the EU-Turkey refugee deal, which resulted in the closing of Turkeys border with Syria, trapping innocent people inside the war zone. This month, European governments also plan on returning migrants to Greece, where some have frozen to death in substandard camps this winter, and to the chaos and violence in Libya. The horrific impacts of these decisions on refugee women and girls cannot be overstated. If fresh accounts of how female migrants through Libya are being repeatedly and systematically raped (Report, 1 March) do not provoke a rethink of the UK and Europes approach, then nothing will.     A young Syrian girl at a refugee camp close to the Turkish-Syrian border near Azaz town in 2016. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images    Whatever shape Brexit takes, the UK cannot project a Global Britain, if its actions project a Little England. We need the UK and the wider EU to offer safe and legal routes for women and girls fleeing violence and persecution. As well as reversing the shameful decision to cut short the sanctuary offered to unaccompanied minors under the Dubs amendment, the government should offer vulnerable adult refugees, including survivors of gender-based violence and pregnant women with family in the UK, a place of safety here. In a world in which some leaders pander to the worst kinds of xenophobia, isolationism and narrowly defined nationalism, we hope for more from both the UK and the EU.Dr Helen Pankhurst Campaign ambassador, Care InternationalMina Jaf Director, Women Refugee Route  Following on from your letters regarding International women Day, I would like to draw your readers attention to the Flower Aid petition on Change.org. It suggests that flower shops and online flower delivery services donate 1% of profits on Mothers Day, Valentines Day and International women Day to women Aid. This would be a much better way of paying respect to women and longer lasting. Where I live, in the Highlands, we are 100 miles away from the nearest refuge. There are peripatetic support workers here but locally and nationally women Aid needs more resources now more than ever. Stephen CoxRoster, Caithness"
"70""Top story: PM rings grammar school changes  Theresa May will pave the way for a new generation of grammar schools on Wednesday, with Philip Hammond set to use his Budget announcement to plough 320m into creating 70,000 places in 140 new schools, which will be free to offer selective education. The prime minister insisted it would guarantee more choice. For too many children, a good school place remains out of reach, with their options determined by where they live or how much money their parents have, she said. Labour accused the government of throwing more good money after bad while the Liberal Democrats called it an unbelievable decision in the face of devastating cuts to school budgets. The chancellor is expected on Wednesday to put aside tax revenues to help build a 60bn reserve to deal with Brexit-related uncertainty. He is also likely to react to a Conservative backlash over the governments business rates changes by offering more transitional relief to companies and to put money towards plugging a massive funding gap for social care. * * * Backpacker ordeal  A British backpacker has survived a two-month ordeal in which she was allegedly beaten, choked and raped in the Australian outback. The 22-year-old was found distressed and with serious injuries when police pulled over a four-wheel-drive in Queensland on Sunday. Her alleged attacker was found hiding in the back and has been remanded in custody. Police said the pair met in Cairns three months ago and agreed to go on a road trip. * * * Kim Jong-nam crisis  North Korea has banned Malaysian citizens from leaving the country, and Malaysia has responded in kind, in an escalation of the row over the killing of North Korean leader Kim Jong-uns half-brother in Kuala Lumpur. Pyongyang said all Malaysians could not leave until the incident that happened in Malaysia is properly solved. Malaysias PM, Najib Razak, called it an abhorrent act, effectively holding our citizens hostage.  Meanwhile, Donald Trump said the nuclear threat posed by North Korea had entered a new phase after the regime test-launched four ballistic missiles towards Japan. * * * Obamacare on notice  The Republican party has unveiled a bill to repeal the Affordable Care Act. It shrinks the governments role in healthcare, and could leave more Americans without insurance. The bill would eliminate the requirement for Americans to have insurance or risk a fine, and let insurers charge the elderly up to five times more than the young. It would require insurers to cover pre-existing conditions, but they could add a 30% surcharge if people are uninsured for too long. Meanwhile, Ben Carson has told his housing and urban development staff that slaves were immigrants who imagined the US as a land of dreams and opportunity.  * * * University sexual harassment  Senior politicians, student leaders and equality campaigners have called for an urgent review of how universities handle allegations of sexual harassment by staff after a Guardian investigation revealed it was at epidemic levels in the UK. Within hours of publication, the research  the first in the UK to provide an insight into the scale of the problem  prompted a further 60 responses from Guardian readers sharing stories of harassment on campus. The National Union of Students said it would launch its own national survey into sexual misconduct by university staff towards students. * * * Wait for the green women  One Australian city has replaced male figures in pedestrian crossing lights with females in an effort to reduce unconscious bias. Melbourne rolled out the scheme on Tuesday and the response has been mixed, with some criticising it as lip service towards gender equality. The lord mayor, Robert Doyle, said: Unfortunately, I think this sort of costly exercise is more likely to bring derision. Lunchtime read: the use and abuse of big data      Big datas power is terrifying. That could be good news for democracy Illustration: Ellie Foreman Peck    Has a digital coup begun, George Monbiot asks. Is big data being used to create personalised political advertising, to bypass our rational minds and alter the way we vote? Either we own political technologies, or they will own us, he argues. Sport New cricket laws will be introduced later this year that include limitations on bat size and letting umpires send off players  just in time for the start of the Ashes series in November. Cyclings Team Sky have closed ranks and backed Sir Dave Brailsford amid suggestions of growing rider unrest within the ranks. In football, Chelsea restored their 10-point lead at the top of the Premier League with a 2-1 win at West Ham, and the chairman of Kick It Out has criticised the Football Associations planned reforms, branding them unfair and superficial.     The new rules could mean the likes of David Warner will have to change their approach to batting. Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty Images    Business Business leaders have made a final plea to the chancellor before the Budget announcement, calling on him to reduce the impact of changes to commercial rates that could double the tax bill for some firms. The British Retail Consortium has written to Philip Hammond, saying the high street needs a fundamental reform of the tax, while a survey by the British Chambers of Commerce found business rates were the biggest concern for half of small firms. The dollar steadied on Tuesday as investors widely expect the Fed to raise interest rates next week and wait for clues, including this weeks US job data.  The pound is buying $1.22 and is worth 1.15. The papers There are two main stories in town today: the return of grammar schools and Paul Burrells new romance.   s Tuesday front page.\" width=\"395\" height=\"500\" class=\"gu-image\" />  The Suns Tuesday front page. Photograph: Twitter    The Telegraph leads on education and runs a column by Theresa May in which she reveals she is scrapping the ban on grammar schools and will spend 320m on 140 new free schools in an attempt to end the brutal and unacceptable truth of selection by income. The Mail takes a different tack, with the news that parents, charities and community groups will be given the right to set up grammar schools. The Guardian also reports on the new generation of grammar schools, with teachers groups asking why the money isnt going into existing state schools.  At the other end of the print media spectrum, The Sun and Daily Mirror both claim exclusives on the same subject: Paul Burrell  Princess Dianas former butler  announcing that he is gay and is marrying his partner.  If you would like to receive the Guardian Morning Briefing by email every weekday at 7am, sign up here.  "
"71""The Northern Territory has decriminalised abortion and widened access for women, including use of the RU486 termination drug. After a years-long public campaign and failed attempts during the previous administration, the Labor-led parliament voted 20 votes to four on Tuesday in favour of a bill to amend the NT Medical Services Act and the criminal code. Labor members were given a conscience vote.   Related: Abortion must be decriminalised in Australia: we cant take our reproductive rights for granted | Mehreen Faruqi    The amended laws will remove requirements for all terminations to occur in hospitals, and ensure RU486 is available outside a hospital setting within the first nine weeks, meaning that women living in remote areas will no longer have to travel vast distances to hospitals in Darwin or Alice Springs. They still require the approval of a doctor for a termination of pregnancies up to 14 weeks, and two doctors for between 14 and 23 weeks. They also ensure any health provider who conscientiously objects to abortion refers patients to a doctor who doesnt, and provides for safe access zones around premises where terminations are performed. We believe all territory women are entitled to control over their lives and access to high-quality services, said the health minister, Natasha Fyles. These are important, community-driven changes. The chief minister, Michael Gunner, said the old laws were excessively restrictive and unintentionally discriminated against women in the NT. Here in the territory we have led the nation in progressive reform, unfortunately on this issue we have lagged intolerably behind, and to the detriment of the rights and health of territory women, he said. The bill also updated the criminal code to decriminalise abortions, leaving Queensland and New South Wales as the only Australian jurisdictions where abortion remains a criminal offence.  In NSW an abortion is allowed if doctors reasonably believe its necessary to avoid serious danger to a womens life or her physical or mental health. Last month a bill to decriminalise abortion was withdrawn from the Queensland parliament after Liberal National members said they would vote against it. Dr Suzanne Belton, of the What RU4 NT lobby group, told Guardian Australia it was a historic day. It really means that NT women have been taken seriously, she said. There was previously discrimination. Belton noted that the bill changed laws which required an adolescent to have consent from both parents before gaining a termination. Its very important for young people to know that [they dont have to involve their parents], she said. In some cases, in some families, thats not appropriate for the adolescent.  The NT bill prompted emotional debate. The independent MLA Gerry Wood took a stand against all kinds of abortion, equating it to domestic violence. Wood proposed a number of amendments, including a reduction in penalties for people charged with harassing women in a safe access zone, and mandatory counselling before an abortion, under penalty of jail time. No amendments were accepted by the government. He has previously described abortion as a fashion and a pathway to a coroner. Wood was supported in his opposition by a fellow independent and former chief minister, Terry Mills. The independent MLA Mark Guyula and the Labor minister Gerry McCarthy also voted against the bill. The deputy opposition leader, Lia Finocchiaro, said it was time medical termination was an option for women facing one of the biggest decisions in their lives, subject to adequate clinical guidelines set in a Northern Territory context. Much of the debate on Tuesday and last year focused on the impact it would have on Indigenous women, particularly those living in remote communities. Selena Uibo told parliament she stood as a young Aboriginal women who wants the same rights as my fellow female Australians in every other state and territory. Uibo said she was appalled that the bill was being diverted from an issue about gender equality into one about race. Aboriginal women, believe it or not, are diverse in nature, opinion, culture, language, beliefs, needs and wants, she said. I was alarmed that some suggestions by lobbyists that Aboriginal women are not educated enough to make decisions for themselves.   Related: Never mind America, access to abortion is a 'nightmare' for many Australians | Van Badham    Uibo also said she hoped those who had lobbied from interstate for the rights of Territorians would be as enthusiastic about addressing the many other inequalities faced by remote communities. The Namatjira MLA, Chansey Paech, tabled a media release by Margaret Tighe of the Melbourne-based Right to Life activist group which he described as offensive and racist. The release said widespread provision of terminations would frequently be seized upon by those social engineers who wish to control the Aboriginal population because of the rising cost of Aboriginal welfare. Her ignorance of this bill and of the reality of access to safe reproductive health services by Aboriginal women living in remote communities is apparent, Paech said. The human rights law centre welcomed the result but said it didnt completely decriminalise abortion and still didnt give women complete control over decision-making. Adrianne Walters, director of Legal Advocacy said NT women still ran the risk of prosecution for late-term abortions, even if, for example, the foetus had a fatal abnormality or the pregnancy was a product of rape. Using the criminal law as a tool to regulate abortion at any stage of a womens pregnancy is hopelessly outdated, discriminatory and bad for women health, said Walters. Walters said requiring two doctors approval was medically unnecessary and paternalistic and tells women they cant be trusted to make decisions about their own bodies. The new laws are expected to be in place by mid-year, coinciding with the release of clinical guidelines which were not available for public consultation before Tuesdays debate."
"72""A bald man in sparkling gold hot pants and aviator shades runs on a treadmill, centre stage beneath a huge light bank and accompanied by booming disco beats. Before him, dancers in skin-tight metallics writhe and jive, leading a growing audience who are initially circumspect but soon busting moves with abandon. Passersby stop to stare, to Instagram, to join in the dance. Is it a performance? A sporting feat? An invitation? According to the website of the man in the hot pants, Tristan Meecham, its a spectacular theatrical and participatory art experience. Titled Fun Run, its a performance he has created in cities all over the world; in each place, community groups  cycling pelotons, skipping teams, brass bands and breakdancers  take turns to accompany him and cheer him on as he runs a full marathon of 42.2km. Its quite bizarre, enormously fun and remains resolutely unexplained to those who happen across it. So whats the point? I think that event spectacles born out of a performance culture have the capacity to shift something for the moment, says Meecham when I speak to him in October. Working under the banner of All the Queens Men, a company he founded with the artist Bec Reid, Meechams events are planned and curated to the last detail, yet they bring the joy of spontaneity to the audiences who happen upon them, much like the original transient flash mobs.  Meechams next project is not focused on enchanting passersby. Instead it is a cultivation of high camp and community spirit for a very specific audience: LGBTI elders. The Coming Back Out Ball, which will premiere at the Victorian Seniors festival in October this year, is a celebration for and of older people from the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex communities. In the lead-up, All the Queens Men has been organising monthly dance classes at Fitzroy town hall for older LGBTI people and their allies.      Bec Reid leads the LGBTI Elders Dance Club at Fitzroy town hall. Photograph: Bryony Jackson    Theres a hunger for a knees-up, a hunger for a celebration, says Meecham, whose enthusiasm is catching. Im imagining a performance of older LGBTI performers, dancing, a three-course meal, an orchestra or big band  a real social event. The City of Melbourne has come on board, alongside the Australia Council for the Arts, Creative Victoria, the Margaret Lawrence Bequest and the Victorian Aids Council  but more important is Meechams collaboration over the next 12 months with those in the LGBTI community.  These are people who came out of the closet when homosexuality was still illegal, he says. Or maybe they couldnt come out at all until recently. The reason Ive thought about scale and spectacle is that by creating an event of significance hopefully it becomes a statement that is felt through peoples bodies in terms of worth. And I dont think thats happened for LGBTI elders before. They called it the gay cancer This is what I say to people: Ive never belonged to the gay community, says Noel Tovey when I visit him on a rain-drenched Sunday afternoon. Because being gay is what I am, it wasnt something that was hidden, so I didnt need the validation or the support of a community. With a lifetimes experience in theatre and performance in Australia and the UK, Tovey has become a mentor to Meecham as he works to bring together all the elements of the Coming Back Out Ball. At the age of 17 in 1951, having survived the kind of abject poverty that cannot be romanticised, Tovey was falsely accused and convicted of the abominable act of buggery, spending weeks in Pentridge prison before being released on a good behaviour bond.      Australian dancer, actor, director and choreographer Noel Tovey    Tovey, a handsome and well-groomed man with a commanding presence, is able to talk almost blithely about these events and how they shaped his life  and what a fabulous life it has been. His heart-wrenching memoir, Little Black Bastard, details a life of perseverance and renown as a choreographer, director and self-taught decorative arts gallery curator in London, before he returned to Australia as one of the leading exponents of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander theatre. Behind this acclaim, however, is a lifetime of loss and reckoning, and it is acknowledgement of this that motivated the writing of Toveys follow-up memoir, And Then I Found Me, published this month by Magabala Books. Tovey speaks eloquently of the events in his memoir, including the loss of his long-term partner, Dave, at the height of the first Aids epidemic: They didnt have a name for it then, they called it the gay cancer, he says. He also lost his daughter to heroin. So I write about that in depth, because shes dead, my mothers dead, my sisters dead, Dave is dead. In fact, all the people I talk about are now either my age or dead. Writing his memoirs has been an unintentional act of catharsis and, having spent so much time in the grip of the past, Tovey is now considering the future. Im 84 and Im a realist, I know Im not going to live forever. When he lost a leg to cancer, he accepted it. I thought I would just be able to get a prosthetic and walk. But over the years it has become misshapen and they have to make me a new one. For now he manages in his one-bedroom flat, leading a busy life of writing, mentoring young Aboriginal actors and still cooking the mouth-watering dishes from the dinner parties he was famous for throwing. I dread going into aged care, he says. I dont think Id ever be ready for communal bingo or communal scrabble. But if I do go into care I want the best care possible. At whatever cost. He has heard that an organisation called Lifeview is building an aged-care facility in Prahran for the LGBTI community and allies but does not think it would suit him. I wouldnt like to go to an aged care where everyone was gay, he says. One young actor wrote to me, a young Aboriginal women, she wrote, Uncle, they want us to study Shakespeare. Why should Aboriginals study Shakespeare? And I said, Do you want to marginalise us even more? He does, however, see the benefit of the kind of art Meecham creates, and is looking forward to the Coming Back Out Ball.     Layne and Chris at the dance club. Photograph: Bryony Jackson    Out, proud and in aged care  Moving into a residential aged care home is nearly always framed as a passive act; a response or submission to old age. Hospital staff talk of placing an elderly patient in a nursing home when a bed  a piece of furniture meant only for repose  becomes available. A persons adult children often orchestrate the move, a necessary response to a series of mishaps or a sudden crisis: a fall, the death of a partner, a decline related to dementia.  It is not a shift many people make willingly; to put it bluntly, moving into aged care is most often the penultimate move a person will make, the final being an exit from this life. It is no small wonder that it can be a trial, regardless of who you are.  The Coming Back Out Ball is so named because one of the biggest challenges faced by many older people within the LGBTI community is whether to be out and proud in late life, or keep this aspect of themselves hidden. Homophobia is hardly a concern of yesteryear: people of diverse gender identity or sexual orientation in Australia are under siege as small-minded, mainly heterosexual, elected officials play politics by withholding from some citizens the civil right of marriage, while also allowing hurtful commentary on the topic under the banner of free speech. Sadly, this is nothing new to those in the LGBTI community who are in their 70s, 80s, 90s and beyond; people who have lived through a lifetime of discrimination as their gender and sexual identity has been pathologised, stigmatised and criminalised.  Once labelled a mental disorder, homosexuality was only completely removed from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  the bible of psychiatry  in 1986 (its much-lauded partial removal in 1973 is better described as a reclassification, as some prominent psychiatrists were unwilling to acknowledge it was not a condition from which a person could be cured). South Australia was the first Australian state to decriminalise male homosexuality in 1975, with the final state, Tasmania, reluctantly following suit after the matter was taken to the high court in 1997.  It was only in 2014 that Victoria introduced legislation to allow historical convictions relating to homosexuality to be expunged  though this isnt automatic: individuals must apply to the Department of Justice to have their convictions removed from the records. For those of us whose personal life has not been subject to overbearing legislation and persecution, we can only attempt to imagine the toll this might take.      Laurie dances. Photograph: Bryony Jackson    Having spent a lifetime hiding an inherent aspect of identity, or time and again choosing when to disclose it, for many people the safest choice when they contemplate entering aged care is to go back in the closet. The mental health support service beyondblue has documented how discrimination, prejudice and abuse all contribute to the higher rates of psychological distress reported by members of the LGBT community compared to the wider population. Research has shown that this distress manifests as depression, anxiety, risky substance use, self-harm and thoughts of suicide. Coupled with the often difficult transition of moving into aged care, a place of unknown people and situations, this can result for many people in acute psychological despair. Were not all the same  I think most of us entering aged care have baggage, says Brenda Appleton, the president of Transgender Victoria. A lot of gay men who are now accessing services had a criminal conviction for homosexuality and that has created, for many of them, a burden for the rest of their lives. So I think it is the difficulty that most of us have had with coming out and being accepted  and accepting ourselves. Transgender Victoria is one of two organisations in the state that offer LGBTI-inclusive training to aged-care service providers. This training is now a necessary component of any aged-care service receiving federal funding, including faith-based organisations.  Theres a real mix in responses from service providers when offered the training, says Appleton. Some are in denial, theyll say, We dont have that sort of person here. Others will say, We dont need special training, we treat everyone the same. If Ive got the chance Ill stamp my foot and say were not all the same and we dont want to be treated all the same. With a commanding presence and a no-nonsense attitude, I can imagine that if Appleton stamps her foot, she gets a response.  Some of the faith-based organisations have struggled with LGBTI-inclusiveness, she says. Weve had many mother superiors block the training. Weve had some turn up at the training with a copy of the Bible and disputed when weve talked about the needs of LGBTI people.     John and David. Photograph: Bryony Jackson    These needs are varied. Research has shown that older LGBTI people fear  and routinely experience  discrimination from aged-care and healthcare service providers. As well as outright homophobia, this discrimination stems from staff and organisational ignorance, and societys overriding heteronormativity, particularly in relation to older people. There is also the assumption that older people, gay or straight, dont have sex and therefore sexuality and sexual expression is a moot point in a residential care facility. This relegates older people to sexless beings they never were while also demonstrating a limited view of diverse gender identity and sexual orientation as being only about the act of sex and not every other aspect of our human need for relationships, touch and love. Weve got many people visiting an elderly person in an aged-care home, not touching them or cuddling them or providing comfort to them because they dont want the staff to know theyre a couple, says Appleton. She describes how this restricting of behaviour isnt limited to residential care but also to peoples private homes: before an aged-care worker or nurse arrives to assist, many LGBTI people routinely remove photos, books and artworks  anything that might give their identity away. The LGBTI-inclusive training addresses these issues by encouraging organisations to review their practices, from small steps such as ensuring that forms allow for mention of partner and family of choice rather than simply husband/wife or family, to making sure staff are only recruited if they are able to deliver inclusive service. Another difficult aspect is addressing the sometimes homophobic behaviour of fellow residents and family members. Appleton tells of a not-unusual situation where a women who had transitioned 38 years before was forced to live as a man when she moved into an aged-care home. Not for fear of staff reaction but because her daughter had never agreed with her transition. The daughter withheld visits from the grandchildren even as the womens dementia closed in. While opening up questions of how any child could treat a parent with such wilful disregard, it must also be asked how any aged-care provider can see their duty as being to the family of the older person rather than the older person herself.  There is a general reluctance to support the forming of sexual and other relationships among residents in aged care, with questions often raised about a persons capacity to grant consent, particularly if dementia is present. But a person with dementia can still make decisions and have preferences, whether they be for relationships or the comfort of intimacy. It is not the job of aged-care staff to police sexual behaviour and expression, but to provide care. Two steps forward, lassos in the air!     Bec Reid and Tristan Meecham. Photograph: Bryony Jackson    Elongated arched windows stand three storeys tall, draped by red-velvet curtains. A side table groans under the weight of chocolate cake, tea and coffee, and a pyramid of lamingtons. On the dance floor, an enthusiastic group of LGBTI elders strut and groove through a line dance to the strains of Dolly Parton. Two steps forward, lassos in the air! calls Reid, waving her arm in the air and skipping forward. Then turn to the side and grapevine, one, two, thats the way! The Coming Back Out Ball is seven months away but in the lead-up Meecham has organised social events and dance classes, held on the first Thursday of every month, where LGBTI elders can meet and relax. They have none of the glamour of the ball  no big names, big hair or big costumes  but they have that undeniably warm sense of something good; that kind of feeling that every community art project valiantly tries to capture but that usually remains elusive.  What they have is care  of the type derived from the verb not the noun; a kindness driven by affection rather than provided in answer to duty.  Meechams modus operandi is a conscientious blend of inclusivity and import for people who have not always been granted that. As discussion of marriage equality or the need for the Safe Schools program enters yet another round we are reminded that real change is still needed, that somehow society still sees fit to treat diversity of gender and sexuality as deviation rather than variation.  The Coming Back Out Ball might seem like a one-off, feel-good celebration, serving little purpose but to entertain, but its ramifications are likely to be lasting, for those on the dance floor and for the wallflowers at the side.  Fun Run will be performed at Cavill Avenue, Surfers Paradise, on Saturday 8 April; LGBTI Elders Dance Club is on the first Thursday of every month at 5.30pm at the Fitzroy town hall; the Coming Back Out Ball is at the Melbourne town hall on 7 October"
"73""In the wake of the intensifying war against women internationally and the growing resistance to it, there is a call for an international women strike on International women Day, 8 March. Inspired by the women strikes in Iceland and then in Poland last autumn in response to the attempts to further criminalise abortion, women in Argentina who are part of the #NiUnaMenos (Not one less) protests against femicide launched a call for an international strike to protest against all violence against women  including economic violence. The magnificent women protests against Trump gave further impetus with the call being taken up in the US and more than 30 countries across the globe. As labour movement activists in Britain, we are organising to celebrate 8 March 2017 in diverse ways, including participating in the 10th Million Women Rise march on 11 March. Some of us will participate in actions organised by Global women Strike in London. We pledge to argue within our unions, women groups and wherever we are active to send messages of support to the network organising the international women strike and to build for future actions. Leanne Wood AM Leader of Plaid Cymru and Assembly Member for the RhonddaHannah Bargawi Department of economics, SOAS, University of London&#xa0;Eileen Best Unison, ManchesterMarian Brain CWU, BirminghamMonique Buchli Islington&#xa0;Unite Community,&#xa0;London Socialist Film Co-opKat Burdon Manley UnisonJustine Canady UCLU Gender and Feminism Society, NCAFC Women and Non-Binary RepCaroline Carney Disability activist, West LondonCristina Chimisso The Open UniversityJane Connor Walthamstow Central LP, Greenwich UnisonTerry Conway Islington Unite Community (Vice chair) Islington North CLPAmy Cousens Swan (socialist women and nonbinary) group, LeedsRuth Clarke women Officer, Islington North CLPHazel Croft UnisonMerry Cross Berkshire DPACSerafina Cuomo Birkbeck College, University of LondonFelicity Dowling, Left UnityEve Drayton HillSara Farris Goldsmiths, University of LondonEleanor Firman East London Unite CommunityAnn FlowersMary FosterZoe GardenerTessa van Gelderen Brent Central CLP, GMBWinmarie Greenland, Left UnityPriyamvada GopalSandra Holliday Secretary WLG/Momentum Rhondda Cynon TaffYemi Hailemariam Islington Unite CommunityJo Halliday Islington South &amp; Finsbury CLPElaine Harrison Newcastle Unite CommunityLouise Harrison Doncaster women lives matter campaignerRosamine Hayeem&#xa0;Harrow East Labour party branchElise Hendricks Screaming VioletsElaine Heffernan UCU Exec electJade Hope Sheffield University, Left UnityChris Hurley West London Left UnityRosie KaneSusan KeeganBev Keenan Manchester Unite CommunityJane Kelly Socialist ResistanceJenny Kidman Vice chair, East London Unite CommunityLucy Lepchani Greenham Women are EverywhereAlison Lord UCUKate MacKenzie Unison, feminist and socialistLesley Mahmood Liverpool anti-cuts activist, Left UnityAmina Mangera SE London Unite CommunitySarah Mayo Screaming Violets Sharon McCourt Birmingham Left UnitySal Morawetz GMB delegate to Nottingham East LPMambenga Mwakana East London Unite CommunityJulie Morrow NUT, RISE, Left UnityDiana Neslen Labour Party, Unison, retiredProf Ozlem Onaran Greenwich Political Economy Research Centre,&#xa0;University of GreenwichSarah Parker Haringey Left UnitySusan Pashkoff East London Unite Community (Acting Chair), Left Unity Liz Peretz Oxford West and Abingdon CLP, Oxford MomentumJoana Perrone Paula Peters DPAC Activist Unite Community South East London Equalities officerRomayne Phoenix Ecosocialist Network Frances Pilling Portsmouth Unite Community Julia Poynter East London Unite Community, Waltham Forest Trades council repAnn Pridmore Being the Boss Joana Ramiro Jenny Russell PCS (ARMS) Natalie Sedacca Estella Schmid Peace in Kurdistan  Women Alliance for Kurdistan, Iraq and Syria Moira Smith Ruth Steigman Axe the Housing ActSara Stevano Department of economics, Soas University of LondonPam Stevens Chair Left Unity WalesInbar Tamari President Hackney NUT, Walthamstow CLPDaniela Tavasci QMULPip Tindall Brighton Benefits Campaign, Enough is Enough, Left UnityBianca Todd Ron Todd FoundationAlison Treacher Unite Community Social Action branch, Greater Manchester, Left UnityPilgrim Tucker Equalities officer Unite Community Lambeth and Southwark branch Carol WilcoxCathy WilsonTina Yemm NUTYuliya Yurechenko International business and economics department, University of GreenwichMaggie Zolobajluk Islington Unite Community equalities officer  On a day when women come together, and the international community recognises the contributions of women to society, it has to be noted that while women have to work harder to get noticed and appreciated, Muslim women have to work four to six times as hard despite sometimes being more qualified. Employers often make incorrect assumptions about how dedicated an employee a Muslim women will be, based on how she dresses. So some Muslim women choose to cover their hair and dress modestly; some people like to cover their elbows and knees. That doesnt mean they dont have something worth saying and it certainly doesnt mean they dont contribute as much to humanity. Muslim women have contributed to society for over 1,500 years, selflessly, quietly, and with dedication, because a lot of them believe in their religions teaching to serve humanity in any way they can. Take the Ahmadiyya Muslim women Association, a highly organised auxiliary of the Ahmadiyya Muslim community and who very much practice what they preach  love for all, hatred for none. Last year alone, women from the Carshalton, Wallington and Sutton branches of the AMWA UK organised dozens of school talks, held interfaith diversity events, delivered hampers to women refuges, visited local care homes, took part in Holocaust Memorial Day, did extensive fundraising and provided tours of the Baitul Futuh mosque - the largest mosque in Britain. The AMWA wish to portray the peaceful, tolerant and fair side of Islam while challenging bias and inequality, forging women advancement, celebrating women achievement and championing women education. They link these aims to the values of their religion which emphasises education for all, achieving high morality, promoting unity and ensuring the next generation is instilled with these values. So on a day when we recognise the importance of women the world over, lets lift the Muslim women in our communities in particular. Not only do they have to combat the hurdle of their gender but they are also now forced to combat hate-filled stones aimed at their religion.Saadiyya KhanCroydon, Surrey  In William Morriss News From Nowhere (Letters, 2 March) everyone is free to do the work they feel suits them best. The women who serve breakfast at the Hammersmith guest house in the story do not just cook and clear up: they run the place as a collective. Later, we encounter women and men haymaking, and a female stonemason who is our best carver. Most children aged four, boys and girls, can read, but book-learning does not interest&#xa0;Nowherians much: they prefer practical knowledge. Everyone speaks at least one other language, and women know as much science and natural history as men. As an upper-middle-class Victorian, Morris was no better or worse than most of his contemporaries. He opposed mothers of families (ie not all women) working in factories  a most abominable custom  but also abhorred factories, preferring workshops. He addressed his employees and duchesses in the same manner  to the duchesses dismay  and aristocratic ladies calling unannounced at the Morrises Kelmscott Manor were appalled by the Morris daughters lack of corsets or coiffure. May Morris, the younger daughter, herself a noted embroiderer, ran Morris &amp; Co for over four decades after her fathers death. Morris believed that under capitalism, all work had been devalued by commerce and the profit motive, but what he perhaps did not emphasise enough is that this applies even more to women work than mens. But in the socialism of Nowhere (Morris called it Communism) this is not the case.Dr Patrick OSullivanFormer editor, Journal of William Morris Studies  Im glad that the new head of sport is a women (BBCs gameplan: why coverage of women football is a core strategy, 6 March), and that she intends to cover more women sport. However, on women Strike Day, and in the interests of equality, I urge all other women to join me in a continuing strike: to refuse to watch, read, or listen to men-only sport until we have equal coverage in the media. Currently we only have 3%, which is shameful. Lets boycott mens sport until we have fair play.Mary GildeaLondon  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"74""There is a plan to mark this International women Day with a global strike; women everywhere expressing their solidarity with one another by withdrawing their labour. There is a good chance that by the time you read this, you will already be at work. There is another good chance that, if you are committed to global women solidarity, the work you do is already more valuable to women than it is to the patriarchy, and, by withdrawing it, you are not even cutting off your nose to spite your face, you are cutting off your nose to spite someone elses face. And then theres the pitfall common to all strike action: that you redistribute oppression, if only in the form of inconvenience, to people who were previously on your side, while leaving unaffected the people you truly want to notice. Specific to women-only action is the question, knocking about since the worldwide women Marches in January, over whether or not this is a good time to be excluding men, just as a united front of everybody with a shared view of humanity is most important. Janelle Brown, from the activist group Sisters Uncut, reminds us that the practical benefits of women-only spaces can outweigh the theoretical downsides: Just not having men in the room makes decision-making much quicker. When theres no interrupting  no bravado, essentially  you get shit done.   You Cut, We Bleed, a direct-action stunt by Sisters Uncut, protesting against cuts to women refuges.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  You Cut, We Bleed, a direct-action stunt by Sisters Uncut, protesting against cuts to women refuges. Photograph: Tom Wren/BNPS    Yet strikes have their own peculiarity, distinct from direct action and from marching. Demonstration is the bluntest tool: there are this many of us; imagine what would happen if we all ceased to cooperate. Direct action is pithier and often more memorable, an attention-getting iteration of an idea. Sisters Uncut, for example, did You Cut, We Bleed, staging a symbolic funeral service in central London to underline that, when funding is withdrawn from women refuges, domestic violence victims die as a result. Strikes are more concrete than either: if exploitation of any kind relies on the idea that the exploited have no inherent worth, you insist upon your value by forcing the world to imagine itself without you in it. This is why strike-breaking is such a particular betrayal  the assertion of value has to be collective, since no one on their own is indispensable from anything. So when you secede from the collective, it is more than a personal choice; its the neutralisation of everyone elses power. But hey, if youre already at work, it cant be helped. The original women strike is Aristophaness play, Lysistrata, in which all the women of Greece go on sex strike to end the Peloponnesian war. Modern feminists decry it for relying implicitly on the notion that women had no sex drives of their own, and just did sex as a favour to men, which they could withdraw at times of high irritation, suffering no adverse consequences, like taking away a teenagers allowance. In fact, in the play, the women are highly sexed and dead against the idea: Lysistrata only manages to persuade them by cursing them and calling them weak, a leadership strategy that would never make it on to an MBA module but nevertheless seemed to work.     Lysistrata Haranguing the Athenian Women, by Aubrey Beardsley. Photograph: Historical Picture Archive/Corbis via Getty Images    Theres something slightly awkward, observes the sociologist Tiffany Jenkins, about the message that thats what women are for, to have sex. Is that the best use of their voice and their agency? She also believes the subject of the strike has to be the locus of the oppression, so a sex strike should be reserved to protest about sexual violence, while a labour strike is used to protest about a pay gap. If it sounds a little abstruse, by the way, to try to solve the feminist framing of the ancient Greeks, the idea of a sex strike has reappeared more recently, in fiction if not in fact. In Spike Lees Chi-Raq, last December, the women of Chicago go on sex strike to end gun violence. Since then, Chicago resident April Lawson has started agitating to enact the idea in real life, though, obviously, its arguable how that will pan out if only she does it. I only realised the depth and value of the idea via Hannah Arendt, and her theory that all humanist politics starts on the assumption of the infinite preciousness of every human life. Lysistrata should be understood not as a sex strike, but a reproduction strike. We wont make any more of these infinitely precious people until you agree to stop senselessly killing them. It doesnt really matter who likes sex and who doesnt; nor whether a women has been reduced to her sexual function in the withdrawal of it. The source of the oppression is the disregard for life, and the answer is to stop creating it. Having started off seeing this women strike as the original but probably the worst, I have come round to the idea that it is actually the best: a perfectly symmetrical, unarguable response to one kind of worldview, by its opposite.   Related: Ten direct actions by women that changed the world | Bidisha    If you worry about a sex strike sounding uncomfortably reductive, you are going to hate the domestic strike: on 24 October 1975, the women of Iceland did no housework, to protest against their feeble, 5% representation in parliament. They technically went on everything-strike, but since their democratic exclusion was mirrored in the workplace, this functionally meant they stopped looking after their children and doing the washing-up (those who did have jobs worked in schools and nurseries, so those had to close as well). A staggering 90% of women took part, after the genius move of renaming it, not a strike, but a women Day Off, dressing up stridency as me-time. Men had to take their children to work, which gave the event its other name: The Long Friday. This action changed the face of Icelandic politics, delivering to Europe its first female president, Vigds Finnbogadttir, five years later. But its significance in the wider feminist landscape is subtler, since that tension of where you situate domestic labour in the fight for equality is, if anything, more pronounced now than it was then. Feminism at home sounds a lot like nagging. The strike was underpinned by a movement, the radical Red Stockings in Iceland, and sister organisations across Europe making the case for paid housework. We now broadly reject domestic responsibilities as innately female, so would struggle to galvanise action around them. Yet we still do most of them (statistically, I mean; I dont personally, I am a slut) and they are still unpaid. I struggle to see much victory in this turn of events.   Black Protest against a planned abortion ban.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Thousands of women went on strike in Warsaw, Poland, during the nationwide Black Protest against a planned abortion ban. Photograph: Czarek Sokolowski/AP    If you want victory, go to Poland: The so-called Black Protest last October, feminist activist Katarzyna Bielinska tells me, was provoked by an attempt to tighten already the extremely restrictive abortion law in Poland by introducing an even more barbarian bill, banning abortion totally, making a women who aborts liable for five years imprisonment, criminalising miscarriage and blocking prenatal foetus investigation and treatment. Tens of thousands of women went on strike, or  this detail pleases me  went to work but dressed in black, and didnt do anything. More than 140 cities, towns and municipalities were profoundly affected, especially public-sector work. The success was huge and unexpected, Bielinska says. The governing Law and Justice party rejected the bill three days after. Rada Boric, from the feminist activist network One Billion Rising, said on a panel last week that the president admitted he was humbled. She let that sit there for a second. A man who the day before had sought what is, in my view, the most profound state oppression there is  taking away a womens choice of when to be a mother, then leveraging her maternal love against her  admitted not just defeat but humility. women rights will need defending in the coming politics. That seems to be incontrovertible. Also discernible is Browns point that a lot of women dont want to sit and talk about things. They dont want to go on Twitter. They want to put their bodies on the line. And if the idea of the strike seems to be borrowed from the trade union movement, a difficult fit, using tactics devised for class mobilisation to galvanise solidarity based on gender, it isnt: they borrowed it from us."
"75""Hundreds of thousands of immigrants and their allies will be marching on the streets and striking on May Day for the annual workers protest. The march is expected to be the largest in years because of the activist energy galvanized by Donald Trump.  A coalition of immigration, labor, racial justice, gender equality and LGBT groups have come together for the May Day protests, which are traditionally led by unions and other labor groups.    Related: Trump: 100 days that shook the world  and the activists fighting back    Two days after Trump celebrates his 100th day as president, these groups plan to demonstrate as a unit against the presidents policies and rhetoric.  Youll see rallies, youll see marches, youll see strikes, youll see any number of events that at the end of the day are doing two things: either calling out Trump on his bigotry but also affirming the rights and the dignity of immigrants and refugees in this country, said Kica Matos, director of immigrant rights and racial justice at the Center for Community Change (CCC). CCC is a social justice organization whose work includes immigration reform. The group was a founding member of the Fair Immigration Reform Movement (Firm), which is helping coordinate at least 138 May Day events in 35 states.  May Day workers demonstrations have always been tied to the immigrant community because of the populations contributions to the US economy, but this year the pro-immigrant message is being made explicit. The Trump administration has shown nothing but contempt for immigrants and refugees and people of color, so we really want to make sure immigrants around the country rise up and speak about the rights of immigrants and the rights of workers, Matos said.    We really want to make sure immigrants around the country rise up and speak about the rights of immigrants and workers  Kica Matos     The May Day actions were rumored to be a reprise of the Day Without Immigrants protests in February, which saw restaurants and construction sites across the country abruptly close because of the strike. There was a similar action on 1 May 2006, when more than 1 million people participated in a protest and boycott for immigrant rights. But this years May Day events vary by locality.  In Houston, people will wear red for a morning rally in the city. In Vancouver, Washington, there will be a rally and march after the work day ends.  In Arkansas, there will be a rally in the states capital, Little Rock, and cultural events and rallies in two cities, Rogers and Portsmouth, which have higher immigrant populations than other parts of the state.  Mireya Reith, director of Arkansas United Community Coalition (AUCC), is an organizer for the Arkansas demonstrations.  She said May Day protests have not been a huge convener in Arkansas, but the group is expecting a larger than usual turnout because of the energy around protests locally and nationally since Trump took office.  Thousands of people joined in the states women march in January and 2,000 people attended a heated town hall hosted by Republican senator Tom Cotton in February to question his partys plan for healthcare, immigration and other issues. We think this is an opportunity to rise up in support of workers, Reith said.    Related: Protesting Trump's immigration policy? You might be accidentally helping him    Bringing in immigrants under the May Day umbrella will be new for Arkansas, but in other parts of the country, that community has always been represented at workers protests.  The Las Vegas march is being organized by Culinary Union Local 226, the states largest immigrant organization. We want to show solidarity between workers that are black and brown and white and LGBT, said the unions spokeswomen, Bethany Khan. Khan expects a minimum of 5,000 people will participate in a march down the famous, casino-lined Las Vegas strip. She was confident the turnout for this protest would be significantly higher than in previous years. In this climate, weve increasingly seen community members mobilizing, Khan said.  The May Day protest will follow months of high-volume demonstrations in the US, including the Peoples Climate March on Saturday. Last week, the March for Science galvanized the traditionally apolitical science crowd, the women March in January was one of the largest demonstrations in US history and the hastily organized Day Without Immigrants protests in February closely followed spontaneous demonstrations at US airports after the White House issued a travel ban for refugees and citizens of seven Muslim-majority countries. "
"76""Students at Hull University face losing marks on essays unless they employ gender-sensitive language. Documents obtained under freedom of information legislation show undergraduates at the university have been advised that language is important and highly symbolic and informed they should be aware of the powerful and symbolic nature of language and use gender-sensitive formulations, while failure to use gender-sensitive language will impact your mark. The document, obtained by the Sunday Times, related to undergraduates on a religious activism course in the universitys school of social science. The direction follows moves by a number of universities to promote gender-neutral language. Cardiff Metropolitan Universitys code of practice on language has a gender-neutral term checklist, giving alternatives for words or phrases, including using efficient for workmanlike and supervisor for foreman. Bath University encourages neutral alternatives to mankind such as humanity, humans or people.   Related: Is it time we agreed on a gender-neutral singular pronoun?    Two years ago, the University of North Carolina handed out a gender-inclusive language guide, which encouraged students away from using words such as mailman , policeman, man-made and other terms, giving alternative titles or descriptions, such as postal carrier. The Hull University directive is seen as going further, with some critics describing it as linguistic policing. Frank Furedi, the emeritus professor of sociology at Kent University, told the Sunday Times: Usually such threats are implicit rather than spelt out as in the case of Hull. This linguistic policing is used as a coercive tool to impose a conformist outlook. The alternative is to pay a penalty of being marked down. Prof Alan Smithers, director of the centre for education and employment research at the University of Buckingham, told the newspaper: Malcolm Bradbury satirised it brilliantly in the 1970s in The History Man where an examiners meeting could not get under way until it had agreed on whether to call the chairman Mr Chairperson. That was more than 40 years ago and by now we should have grown beyond this pettifogging. But Dr Lia Litosseliti, senior lecturer in linguistics at City, University of London, told the Guardian: Language is a symbolic resource and words are rarely neutral. Given the many possibilities for using language to define, trivialise or make people and groups invisible, it should come as no surprise that linguistic intervention as one way to help build more inclusive societies has a long history. It is easy to dismiss or ridicule such attempts (as is often done) as policing or political correctness gone mad. It is harder to have a proper discussion about the genuine need to raise awareness of the role language can play in reinforcing as well as contesting gender inequalities. Even harder still, is to have the discussion about language while at the same time addressing, and not obscuring, the very real, structural inequalities in our society. This is the discussion we should be having. Prof Judith Baxter, emeritus professor of applied linguistics at Aston University, said: The principle of gender-neutral language has been around for at least 30 years. Businesses, schools, publishing, academic and educational texts use gender-neutral language now. So there is a total expectation.  Most universities have just incorporated it in their general way of things. So it is a little bit odd that they have made it regulatory. I just think that is a step too far. Taking this regulatory, punitive attitude to the whole business of gender neutrality is a backward step. What it does is set up resistance. It will make people annoyed, not want to comply, when I think the majority of students would incorporate these sorts of approaches anyway. There was no immediate comment from Hull University. But a senior lecturer in religion at the university, speaking anonymously, said: Language is powerful and we place a high emphasis on gender-neutral language on our courses. Should any student use language which is not deemed gender-neutral, they will be offered feedback as to why. Deduction of marks is taken on a case-by-case basis."
"77""I have no great desire to do a feminist analysis of the marriage of Emmanuel Macron, the last non-fascist standing in the forthcoming French elections, but the fathomless nastiness of the Daily Mail has made it necessary. How can I get the world to take me seriously, writes Jan Moir, channelling Macrons interior voice, if they think I am a mummys boy with a wife who is 25 years older than him? This idea is dispatched relatively easily: men dont need authority over their wives in order to be taken seriously, except in the Sopranos and the 12th century. One of these days, that entire newspaper will realise how close it is in outlook to Isis and cut those medieval terrorists some solidarity slack.     Emmanuel Macron embraces his wife Brigitte after the first round of the presidential elections. Photograph: Eric Feferberg/AFP/Getty Images    Yet the relationship is tricky from a gender relativist point of view; if Madame Macron were a male drama teacher, leaving his marriage for a student whom he met when she was 15, then, even if they waited until she (the hypothetical student) were 18, as the Macrons did in real life, the feminist would still have a thing or two to say. The double whammy of her being so much older, and in a position of authority, sets the relationship off on an imbalance. The common sense, middle-of-the-road, Delia Smith-style feminist would say, well, after two decades together, we can probably be satisfied that their feelings are authentic, and not the result of some authority fetish on one side, and a controlling nature on the other. But the more hardcore, absolutist, Nigella-style feminist would nope the whole thing, on the basis that a relationship conceived on an unequal footing can never find its balance. In order to overlook all of that, because the gender roles are reversed, you would have to consider it impossible for a women to exert power over a man, regardless of her age and position. The social architecture of heterosexual relations, combined with the endemic ageism in the way female sexuality and attractiveness are perceived, mean that being older, as a women, isnt an advantage; au contraire, it makes her the weaker party, since he is such a stud and she is so past it. Im not wild about that reading, either, since it is observably true that women can hold all the cards. The thing to recognise is that equality sometimes has competing demands: consistency is important, so it matters that if you would disapprove of an age disparity going one way, you at least consider why you dont disapprove of it going the other. Yet ageism is important, too, so you have to rejoice in Macron kicking against the really pernicious and widespread view that a womens attractiveness is pegged directly to how close she is to 18. Im going to go with: The heart wants what it wants. These are dizzy times and we all have fascists to fight."
"78""Chinas latest boyband have all the usual trappings: five attractive singers, upbeat music and a loyal fanbase of young women. But in one crucial detail they are different. This boyband is made up entirely of girls. Acrush have yet to release their first single, but their fan page has already attracted more than 750,000 followers after a series of live performances. Their admirers already call the women husbands, a term usually used by female Chinese fans to refer to male pop stars.    Related: Hong Kong charges pro-independence activists over China protest    The A in the bands name refers to Adonis, a figure in ancient Greek mythology whose name has become synonymous with male beauty. Acrush released their first music video on Friday. China remains a conservative country in terms of gender roles, with company and the government leadership heavily male-dominated and sexist attitudes prevalent. Job advertisements frequently specify a desired gender, and five feminist activists were detained in 2015 for planning events to raise awareness of sexual harassment to mark International women Day.  But Wang Tianhai, the Simon Cowell-esque figure behind the scenes whose company formed the band, says he has no intention of pushing a political message. They just enjoy the male appearance, the carefree style and want to sing like men, Wang said. They want to express a positive and sunny image, to show that girls can be a boyband too. Wang said he originally intended to push a cutesy girl group. But Acrush has since become the companys star act after a smattering of concerts led to overwhelmingly positive response, including a flood of love letters from female fans. Not everyone has accepted their style. Some people dont understand and dont accept our androgynous style, but weve received a lot of support from our fans, said Lu Keran, the bands 21-year-old leader. Lu has worn short hair since she was a child, and said she was sometimes chased out of women bathrooms for looking like a little boy. Wang said: Theres prejudice, and some people think because of their style then they are homosexual, and use that to criticise the band.  The manager has prohibited members of Acrush from discussing their sexual orientation, and he said there was a sizeable contingent of anti-fans who trolled the band over their looks.  But the quintet have precedents, both in Chinese culture and in pop forerunners who adopted similar styles over a decade ago.  Theres a long history of cross-gender performance in China, male playing female roles and vice-versa, in traditional Chinese theatre, said Lucetta Kam, a professor of gender studies at Hong Kong Baptist University. Feminist issues are getting more and more politically sensitive under the current political regime, but as long as they dont mention any gender issues and remain entertainment-oriented, its all OK. Li Yuchun won Super Girl, a female-only version of Pop Idol, in 2005 with boyish looks. Li, who also uses the English name Chris, has maintained her androgynous look and has become one of the biggest stars in China, signing deals with Coca-Cola and LOral.  Despite Lis stardom, some members of Acrush said they had felt alone before the band formed.  I feel very lucky to have met a group of like-minded people, Lu said. An important message we want to convey to our fans is that its important to be true to who you are. With additional reporting by Wang Zhen"
"79""Aung San, father of Suu Kyi, recognised the divergent aspirations of the Shans, Mons, Karens, Chins, Burmans and a&#xa0;myriad of other national groups, including those like the Muslim Rohingyas who arrived and settled more recently (Report, 31 March). Independence from British rule was not just that, it was a challenge to form an inclusive Burmese identity not dominated by the majority Buddhist Burmans. Aung&#xa0;San Suu Kyi has never shown an understanding of the need to channel the contested idea of Myanmar identity into a constructive force. Instead, her view of Myanmar politics has been shaped by a single-minded focus on replacing the military rulers by elected rulers.SP ChakravartyBangor, Gwynedd  Why the retrograde step (HSBC to offer customers choice of gender-neutral titles, 31 March)? My current bank cards from HSBC carry no title, nor&#xa0;do letters in the Guardian. Unless it truly is optional, of course, and people wish to use such titles. Just please dont say the computer needs it. I changed one bank account after it refused to accept creation of an account without a title.Hilary GrimeOxford  Isnt it a bit misleading to classify exercise by how long you do it (One in four adults take less than 30 minutes of exercise every week, 31 March)? By that measure, in my 70s I take exercise for far longer than I did in my 50s, but only because it takes me twice as long to get up the mountain and back down again.Margaret SquiresSt Andrews, Fife  I was interested to read about the campaign to rename a building at Bristol University because the fortune of Henry Wills III, who funded it, derived from the slave trade (Pass notes, G2, 30&#xa0;March). Has anyone warned the Tate?Ian WestBroseley, Shropshire  Forty years on  and not a word about San Serriffe (April Fool, 1977). Where is it now? How far-flung are the Flongs? What happened in the Serriffendum? We need to know.Adrian SinfieldEdinburgh  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"80""Bill OReilly is so far keeping his $18m-a-year gig at Fox, despite serial accusations of sexual harassment. The US vice-president apparently wont dine alone with any women other than his wife. And just about every week now, it seems, theres a photo released of another all-male group of legislators gathered around a table in Washington preparing to strip women of essential benefits  in what some believe is a calculated signal to the GOP base that the US Congress remains a boys club. How did we suddenly wind up back in the Mad Men era when it comes to gender relations at work? As battles we thought had been settled decades ago resurface, social scientists say were witnessing a backlash to the loss of male dominance in the world of work. The phenomenon was a key factor in the election of Donald Trump.        video\"            data-video-provider=\"Reuters\"            >    Wendy Walsh details allegations against Fox News host Bill OReilly    Dan Cassino, a political scientist at Fairleigh Dickinson University, found when he asked primary voters questions crafted to remind them that many women earn more money than men, those men became less likely to support Hillary Clinton.  Some white guys in power would like to keep it for themselves, thank you very much. With a little help from voter suppression and democratic complacency, maybe they will. As the attorney Lisa Bloom put it in a Monday press conference calling out a culture of sexism at Fox: We are not living in the stone age or the Mad Men era. She was speaking alongside her client Wendy Walsh, one of the most recent women to step forward to accuse OReilly of harassment, and she seemed to be trying to convince herself as much as anyone. Bloom is also the attorney for Jill Harth, Trumps former business partner and the first women to go on record accusing him of sexual assault  and last year, along with her mother, Gloria Allred, she was the go-to lawyer for women accusing the soon-to-be president of sexual misconduct.   Related: The destruction of Hillary Clinton: sexism, Sanders, and the millennial feminists | Susan Bordo    That such work is every bit as relevant today as when her mother began doing it decades ago would not surprise the Mad Men staff writer Carly Wray. The show takes place in the 1960s, but so much is about today, Wray said in a recent interview. Its just a lens through which youre seeing these stories that happen every day in everybodys lives. But whats happening now feels less like a blip or continuation than a backlash. It wasnt just that white Americans voted Republican, which they usually do, the writer Rebecca Traister observed after Hillary Clintons loss. Its that they chose a uniquely unqualified candidate who openly sold himself on promises of resistance to and revenge on the women and people of color who were poised to exert a historic degree of power.    club? Some see the Trump administration as a return to retro gender roles.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Boys club? Some see the Trump administration as a return to retro gender roles. Photograph: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images    Were seeing that play in other realms too. Its not just that Fox stood by Bill OReilly when new allegations of sexual assault emerged: its that a large audience did, too. Its no coincidence that he hosts the most popular show on cable news, generating a reported $446m in ad revenue between 2014 and 2016 alone. His regressive worldview with respect to women in the workplace isnt incidental to his bestselling books  its central to it. If he is a one-man multimedia juggernaut and a star asset, as hes been described, its in no small part because his audience subscribes to the brand of machismo hes selling. So too, it seems, do an increasing number of young Americans. Reports from the Council on Contemporary Families confirm a drop in support for gender equality in family arrangements among voters aged 18 to 25 compared with 20 years ago. And a study monitoring the attitudes of high school seniors found that between 1994 and 2014, the proportion of high school seniors who agreed the husband should make all the important decisions in the family jumped roughly 10 percentage points. By 2014, 58% of students questioned said they preferred a family arrangement in which men are breadwinners and women stay at home.  At the end of Mad Mens run in 2015, the writer Matthew Gilbert wrote that the show would be remembered for its depiction of what it meant for a women to have lived in a mans world.  The optimism  then as now  was in the conviction that a mans world would someday truly be past tense. If the future is female, it feels very far away."
"81""Top story: Trump talks tough on Idlib chemical attack Hello, its Warren Murray with the news you need this morning. Bashar al-Assads apparent use of chemical weapons to kill more than 70 people in Idlib crossed many, many lines according to Donald Trump. But what will the US president do about it? That, it seems, is where the line becomes blurred. Having underlined his all-options-on-the-table rhetoric (which he has also directed at North Korea just now), Trump faces the condundrum of how to deliver, write Julian Borger and Spencer Ackerman. A military intervention would mean going directly up against Vladimir Putin, who is fighting on the side of Assad, and probably killing Russians. But failing to act would look weak. Today, Trump also begins hosting Xi Jinping at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida. One option that wont be on the table is golf. The Chinese president doesnt play the game, and Communist party leaders have at various times denounced and even banned it. Trump wants to talk about reducing the US trade deficit with China, bringing back jobs and getting Xi to help with North Korea. Our experts take: given Trump backtracked over Taiwan, and has directed complaints but no concrete action at Beijing so far, its Xi who goes into this encounter holding all the cards. * * * Term-time holiday ruling  The supreme court is to hand down its ruling today on the contentious issue of whether parents can legally take their children out of school during term. Jeremy Corbyn, meanwhile, is to pledge that Labour will charge VAT on private school fees to fund school meals for all primary school children. * * * Payback time  A law forcing larger companies to reveal their gender pay gap comes into force today. Firms with more than 250 employees will have to publish their first figures before April next year, including breakdowns of men and women in different pay bands, and women bonuses compared with mens. The government argues that eliminating the gap could add 150bn to national productivity as firms with greater gender diversity tend to have better financial results. * * * China comes to Oxford  Peking University, where Mao Zedong was once a librarian, has bought Foxcombe Hall in Oxfordshire and will open a branch of its HSBC Business school with views of the city of dreaming spires.     Peking University is to open an Oxford campus at Foxcombe Hall. Photograph: Peking University HSBC Business School    The university makes no secret of its ties with the Communist party, which it says helped seal the 8.8m deal to buy the former home of the eighth earl of Berkeley. President Xi Jinping has cracked down on freedom of expression and declared Chinas universities should make it their mission to indoctrinate students with the party line. At Foxcombe Hall you will be able to learn about professional knowledge of Chinas economy, financial market and corporate management. Presumably in a framework approved by Big Daddy Xi   * * * Tinned spaghetti pizza  The New Zealand prime minister might not be asked to cook for the family again any time soon. Bill English reprised what is evidently a classic South Island dish for his brood and posted the results on Facebook.         video\"            data-video-provider=\"guardian.co.uk\"            >    May need a spoon: the Guardian taste tests New Zealand PMs spaghetti pizza    But his creation  topped off with pineapple chunks  has polarised the nation, with some accusing the PM of culinary vandalism and creating a canned social media opportunity to divert attention from his governments troubles. Our New Zealand correspondent Eleanor Ainge Roy recruited a local pizza joint to make her one. The verdict: it tastes good  like a toasted cheese sandwich. So go eat a toasted cheese sandwich then and spare us this grossness! * * * Moths having a ball  Our history is literally being eaten away as voracious moths tuck into precious curtains, carpets, costumes and tapestries hundreds of years old. The pale-backed clothes moth, Monopis sp., is the main culprit, and English Heritage is asking people to collect free traps from its properties, put them out at home and then report back after a few months to help gauge the scale of their spread. Meanwhile if your own knitwear comes under direct attack, if its a beloved jumper, stick it in the freezer. If not, chuck it.    Lunchtime read: Angela Merkel brought to book   s border to migrants by Angela Merkel\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Two new books focus on the opening of Germanys border to migrants by Angela Merkel. Photograph: Markus Schreiber/AP    The German chancellors decision in 2015 to open the borders to thousands of migrants has become a page-turner, with a newly released non-fiction thriller sitting on top of the bestseller lists and another, a fictional take, due to come out tomorrow. As Angela Merkel gears up for a re-election bid, Germans are hungry to understand what was going on, in her head and behind the scenes of government, when she announced the hugely consequential move that autumn, writes Philip Oltermann. Sport Chelseas grip on the Premier League title strengthened after a brace from Eden Hazard saw off Manchester City at Stamford Bridge, but Tottenhams hopes are still alive after a dramatic late win over relegation-threatened Swansea. Arsne Wengers cause, meanwhile, was given a shot in the arm as Mesut zil sparked Arsenals 3-0 win over West Ham. With the Masters about to get under way, the participation of favourite Dustin Johnson has been thrown into jeopardy after a serious fall down stairs left the world No1 with a back injury. In other news, Wladimir Klitschko has praised Anthony Joshuas strength but queried his boxing ability, and Saracens performance director Phil Morrow has been recruited by Warren Gatland for the British and Irish Lions tour to New Zealand this summer. Business Donald Trumps first meeting with Xi Jinping is weighing on the markets with investors nervous about a possible US-China trade war if things go badly in Florida. Stocks in Japan slipped to their lowest since early December while Australian shares lost 0.6%. The FTSE100 is set to fall nearly 1% when it opens later this morning. The pound is flat at $1.25 and if youre Europe-bound its buying 1.17. The papers Most of the tabloids are leading again on the troubles of singer Mel B and her marriage. The Sun, Mirror and Star all give the story splash headlines and pictures.     Front page of the Guardian 6 April 2017.    The Times meanwhile says the government is being told to think again about increases in probate fees  some could rise from 155 to as much as 20,000 for larger estates in the event of death. The Lord Chancellor has been advised it could be seen as a tax, which would need the approval of parliament. The Telegraph takes up most of its front page with Syria saying: Trump squares up to Assad over attack. It has a secondary news report about a father who watched his twins choke to death during the poison gas attack. The Mail decides that foreign aid is the story of the day: Now it soars by 1.2 billion the headline reads. The story says an EU reassessment of the increased size of Britains economy has seen the amount of foreign aid increase. That is because the UK government promises to send 0.7% of national income abroad. The FTs headline reads: May envisages free movement past 2019 as Brexit stance softens. It says the prime minister has accepted the possibility of an extension of the free movement of people from Europe.  Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Morning Briefing by email every weekday at 7am, sign up here."
"82"" 2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9    10    11    12    13    14    15    16    17    18    19    20    21    22    23    24    25    26    27    28    29    30    31    32    33    34    35    36    37    38    39    40 "
"83""Frances new president, Emmanuel Macron, may have written several unpublished novels inspired by everything from the Spanish conquest of Mexico to the life of a Paris pianist, but it is the literary endeavours of his newly appointed government that have come under the spotlight this week. Nine of its members have published books, from political essays and historical biographies to pulp fiction and political crime thrillers. The culture minister heads a major publishing house, and the economy minister, rightwing Bruno Le Maire, once wrote racy romances about a lovestruck nurse  under a pseudonym  before graduating to literary fiction and memoirs.  However, the biggest fuss has been reserved for the political thrillers of the new rightwing prime minister, douard Philippe  particularly over what his novels say about politics and women.  Philippe, who as mayor of the Normandy port city of Le Havre introduced a literary festival, has co-written two novels in the past decade, both satires on French politics. His most recent, Dans lOmbre (In the Shadows), was published in 2011 and co-written with Gilles Boyer, who, like Philippe, was an aide to the former centre-right prime minister Alain Jupp.  Dans lOmbre is a scathing saga about ego and wrongdoing in a French presidential election campaign  from a spoonfed political press, to warring politicians, ageing candidates whose age must never be mentioned, and rightwingers bored by constantly having to traipse around Charles de Gaulles birthplace for the cameras.  The narrator is a cold and jaded political adviser known only as the Apparatchik. The books toxic mix of infighting and moral emptiness might hint at why Philippe jumped ship to help fulfil Macrons promise to rebuild French politics in a new kind of neither left nor right centrist compromise. Nevertheless, centrists are not spared in the book. Negotiating with a centrist is like trying to catch an eel in a bowl of olive oil, the narrator says.  But it is the female characters who have sparked the most controversy, because of the ongoing battle against sexism that still looms over French politics. The narrator describes a senior female candidate in her legendary trouser suits as having that imperceptible coldness of women who will never be mothers. A senior press officer is referred to as Marilyn on account of her attractiveness. Everyone was wondering who the first member of parliament would be to get the trophy, the narrator says of the all-male teams desire to sleep with the press officer.  The Apparatchik has in the past had two one-night stands with her, and though he rates her intelligence, he complains that she has small breasts. I dont usually like that, he adds, saying he prefers rounder breasts. Not imposing and shapeless, not heavy to the point of having drooped, but, rather, something with a bit of shape  A real chest is round, comfortable, welcoming, and one should be able to put ones nose into the middle with jubilation. The weekly LExpress complained under the headline The macho-erotic thoughts of Edouard Philippes hero. But the daily Libration shot back that an author must never be confused with a fictional character  particularly when it is a satirical character so clearly being held up to criticism and when no one knows which of the co-authors wrote which part.  Philippes position on gender equality will be rated by the new governments action on equality, and by what changes will be introduced by Marlne Schiappa, the new junior minister for gender equality. The feminist group Osez le Fminisme has complained that as an MP, Philippe abstained in 2014 on a vote for a sweeping gender equality law."
"84"" News Corp journalist Shannon Molloy has resigned from the board of the New South Wales Gay and Lesbian Rights Lobby amid reports of a targeted campaign by third parties against his involvement because of his employer. Jill Stark, a former Age journalist who reports on LGBTI issues, said Molloy had been pressured to quit by people who complained that his employment by News Corp put him at odds with the organisation.  I was devastated when I heard, she said. What an absolute own goal by activists who are trying to strike a blow for equality and have forced a gay man to resign from a gay rights organisation.   Related: AFL and AFLW players from every team sign same-sex marriage petition    Complainants had suggested News Corps reportage around the Safe Schools program and young queer and transgender Australians meant that Molloys involvement compromised the lobbys integrity.  How can NSW GLRL call out the trans hate from News Corp when one of its national journos sits on the board? Rodney Chiang-Cruise wrote on Twitter.  He continued his comments on Facebook: You have on your board a member of an organisation that repeatedly, systematically, viciously attacked and harms trans and gender diverse kids. I believe this compromises and undermines your organisations credibility. Other journalists and LGBTI rights activists have conveyed their dismay at Molloys resignation, saying he had done important work for the community.     Another example of our community piling on to one of its own, who was just trying to help Rob Stott (@Rob_Stott) May 22, 2017      Sending support to #ShannonMolloy. As a fmr gay Republican, we have to distinguish ppl from orgs. This is a shame cc @NSWGLRL @chrispytweets Dr Chris Pepin-Neff (@christopherneff) May 23, 2017      Anyone who has read this should know @sleemol is an excellent asset to both News and NSWGLRL. It&#39;s unfair and unhelpful to target him. Josh Taylor (@joshgnosis) May 22, 2017    The NSW Gay and Lesbian Rights Lobby released a statement on Tuesday night supporting Molloy saying he would be welcomed back if he chose to return to the organisation. There is a difference between having a debate on an issue, and personally attacking someone, the statement said. The behaviour that has been shown this week towards particular individuals that have proudly volunteered for our organisation has been nothing short of appalling. It is damaging, and there should be consequences for those responsible. There is a difference between having a debate on an issue, and personally attacking someone. The behaviour that has been shown this week towards particular individuals that have proudly volunteered for our organisation has been nothing short of appalling. It is damaging, and there should be consequences for those responsible. Many cited an article Molloy wrote in February 2016 for the Daily Telegraph that spoke in support of Safe Schools and detailed his experience of homophobic bullying.  I was bashed, ridiculed, taunted endlessly, you name it, he wrote. I dont speak about my adolescence often. The truth is that Im still traumatised by the unspeakably horrific things I endured as a teenager that the mere thought of them makes me ill. Molloy has worked as a TV and entertainment writer for News Corp since 2014 and recently began working as a national reporter and producer.  Stark said he was loved and valued as a journalist and an advocate.  Shannon wrote a very powerful piece for News Corp about his experience of homophobic bullying in high school, which had an incredible reaction, and this incident brought him right back there.    Related: Petition calling for Safe Schools replacement withdrawn after LGBTI backlash    All that this has achieved is to rob the LGBTI community of a passionate advocate. It gives opponents of equality a free kick because it divides the community.  Established in 1988, the lobby is the peak organisation for lesbian and gay rights in NSW and works towards achieving legal and social equality for LGBTI Australians. Board members are voluntary positions.  Stark said she hoped Molloy would return to the organisation. To hold an individual journalist responsible for the entire reporting of a multinational multimedia company is ridiculous, she said. Youve also robbed the world of a voice that had a powerful platform.  I think having Shannon on the board in no way prevented that organisation lobbying News Corp as an entity to do better. Its not as if Shannon is a member of the Australian Christian Lobby. Theyve targeted a gay man who was volunteering his time for a gay rights organisation. Molloy declined to comment."
"85""If there was ever a week to remind you how much toxic masculinity underpins the Republican party  this was it. Trump pushed Montenegros prime minister (complete with self-satisfied smirk) and Montanas newest congressional representative won his seat despite having assaulted a Guardian reporter  a move Rush Limbaugh lauded as manly. When this is all over, gender studies professors are going to have a hell of time teaching students about the era in history that amounted to little more than a (ahem) measuring contest.  Glass Half Full At least among the continued horrors of living under a Trump presidency, Black Lives Matter got some of the recognition it deserves when it won the Sydney peace prize. Naomi Klein, a previous recipient, said that the movement founders Patrisse Cullors, Alicia Garza and Opal Tometi embody the core principle of the Sydney peace prize: that there will never be peace without real justice.  What Im RTing    Did Trump just shove another NATO leader to be in the front of the group? pic.twitter.com/bL1r2auELd&mdash; Steve Kopack (@SteveKopack) May 25, 2017      New York Forces Women Like Me to Carry Nonviable Pregnancies to Term Scott Lemieux (@LemieuxLGM) May 23, 2017      depending on how much you weigh, the morning-after pill doesnt necessarily work  dodai (@dodaistewart) May 23, 2017      Our domestic &amp; international policy on women&#39;s issues is literally now just Ivanka appearing &amp; saying the word &quot;women&quot; &amp; then drifting away. Dana Stevens (@thehighsign) May 21, 2017    Who Im reading The Naral president, Ilyse Hogue, on why Dems cant waver on abortion rights; the New Orleans mayor, Mitch Landrieu, on the removal of Confederate statues; and Politico on the real Jared Kushner. What Im hate-reading This fawning piece on Melania and Ivankas feminine power amounts to little more than complimenting the women for being pretty and well-dressed and each line is more insipid than the last. Enjoy! What Im watching Brittney Cooper has a trailer for her new must-read book, Beyond Respectability: The Intellectual Thought of Race Women.            What Im writing The Guardian got a hold of Facebooks guidelines on handling harassment and hate speech, and theyre way too lenient - why give the benefit of the doubt to abusers?  How outraged I am The Texas House passed an anti-choice bill that would make it a crime to drive a women to get an abortion and on a scale from 1 to 10, Im at a Handmaids 11. How Im making it through this week Reading and re-reading my kids love letter to science. (Wow.)      Sign up for The Week in Patriarchy, Jessica Valentis weekly email newsletter, which tracks whats happening in the world of feminism and sexism, from politics to pop culture.     "
"86""Bulgaria has become the latest eastern European state to accuse multinationals of selling food of a lower quality in their country than in the west, and has launched a pan-European taste-test to prove its case. The countrys minister for agriculture, food and forestry, Rumen Porozhanov, said experts had been sent to buy well-known food and drink products in western supermarkets.  Next week, we will buy identical products that are sold on the Bulgarian market by the big chains and then the analysis will start, he added. It is claimed that major food companies are using poorer-quality ingredients in products sold in central and eastern Europe than in Germany, Austria and the UK, among others. The newly elected Bulgarian prime minister, Boyko Borissov, appeared to attribute the alleged differences in quality to the legacy of the cold war, in comments following a special sitting of the Bulgarian cabinet.  This is unacceptable and insulting, he told reporters on announcing a review. Maybe this is a remnant of apartheid  for some, food should be of higher quality, and for others, in Eastern Europe, of lower quality.   Related: Hungary threatens to ban Heineken's red star as 'communist'    Included in the analysis being undertaken by the Bulgarian food safety agency are popular chocolate, dairy and meat products, non-alcoholic beverages, juices and baby foods. Bulgarias ombudsman, Maya Manolova, has also reportedly approached Vra Jourov  the European commissioner for justice, consumers and gender equality  about the issue. It is unclear what evidence Bulgaria has for its claims.  When asked for an explanation, a spokesman for the Bulgarian food safety agency said: Actually, we are still collecting samples to conduct the research. We cannot declare results right now. Now our experts are sampling..  He said the results of the research would not be available until 30 June. The complaint, however, follows similar allegations from the governments of the Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia. All four countries are members of the European Union. Hungarys food safety authority claimed in February to have discovered that Nutella sold in Hungarian supermarkets is not as mellow as the brand in Austria, for example.  The spreads Italian maker, Ferrero, has strongly denied there is any difference in quality. A study published by the Slovakian government in April alleged that the main differences in various products were related to:   Related: How can we put the taste back into British food?     The proportion of fats. The different content of meat. The addition of artificial sweeteners instead of natural sweeteners. The substitution of colouring and artificial fruit aroma for real fruit.  When ordering a review in his country, the Czech agriculture minister Marian Jureka claimed: Where some products are concerned, we have turned into Europes garbage can. The suspicion that products sold in eastern Europe are inferior to those in the supermarkets in the west has long had a firm hold in the public imagination in the Visegrd group countries (the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia). And the suspicion has been one of the weapons used by the Hungarian government led by Viktor Orbn to attack Brussels. The latest flurry of accusations builds on complaints first made in 2011 by the Slovak association of consumers.  The European commission has largely dismissed the complaints, noting that multinational companies are free to adapt their products to different markets as long as EU laws on labelling and safety are respected."
"87""In both the fictional world of the 1999 film The Matrix and the very real one of the mens rights movement, the red pill represents embracing reality in all its uncomfortable complexity. Proponents tell of their red pill moment, the point at which they rejected blissful ignorance for reality. In the context of mens rights activism, their uncomfortable truth is that mens lives are of lesser value than women (The Matrix itself doesnt appear to have any particular notions on gender equality). At Sydney University on Thursday night, a large group of students had either taken their medicine, or were part of groups strenuously resisting it. The Conservative Club and Students For Liberty (for classical liberals and libertarians) had organised a screening of The Red Pill, Cassie Jayes controversial documentary on mens rights activism (MRA). Fascist Free USyd and the Socialist Alternative Club had organised a protest against it.   Related: The Red Pill: Melbourne cinema drops men's rights film after feminist backlash    Outside a small auditorium in which the film was to be shown, and under the observation of a small group of police officers, the two groups taunted and filmed and rallied against each other. Rival chants started up  GOODNIGHT ALTRIGHT from those holding banners about the MRAs tears, and FREE-DOM, FREE-DOM from a group that included a man in a shirt that read FEMINISM IS CANCER and another in a Make America Great Again cap. Eleanor Morley, of Fascist Free USyd and the Socialist Alternative Club, told Guardian Australia the film was deeply misogynistic and gave a platform to mens rights activists with outrageous views about women. She had watched it online the previous night: I thought it was a bit of a joke, really. It made no impact on me. But its argument that men were systematically oppressed by society, she very strongly disagreed with. The film was worrying for its anti-women stance, which, Morley said, reflected that of the US president: Its not just as an isolated group of weirdos who share these views. A ban on the film Morley referenced in Melbourne last year was a private screening, organised by a mens rights group, that was cancelled by the cinema after an online petition. Much of the backlash had assumed it was a curatorial decision, a representative of Kino cinema had said, which was potentially damaging to its credibility. On campus, the battle was ideological, not commercial. For those in favour, the Red Pill was a proxy for freedom of speech but it represented misogyny for those against it. Morley said the intent of the protest was not to shut the screening down: Were simply here to present a counter, left-wing, pro-women, anti-homophobic message. According to Conservative Club members, the protesters initial plan had been to storm the auditorium halfway through, effectively ending the event. The odds were seen to be tipped in the protestors favour when, a month out from the screening, the University of Sydney Union announced that it had decided to disallow the use of its funds or resources for the screening after receiving a number of complaints.  In a statement headed with a content warning for sexism and rape, USU said the film was discriminatory against women, and has the capacity to intimidate and physically threaten women on campus. The Conservative Club reproduced this on posters promoting the event: See the film that USU tried to stop you from seeing. I put a trigger warning on the tickets because, according to USU, this film is physically threatening to women, organiser Renee Gorman told the crowd of about 100, perhaps 80% men, gathered inside the auditorium before the screening on Thursday night. I dont know about you girls here, but I put on my big girl panties this morning. This prompted whoops from the crowd; Gorman herself had been applauded as shed arrived, flush from the frontline of combat against those ferals ... the crazies outside the auditorium. Inside the atmosphere was jubilant, she observed. I think were in a pretty good mood. I think that was just funny. When USU defunded the event, Gorman paid $530 for the venue hire and two security guards. It was for two good causes, she said: fighting censorship on campus and prostate cancer. Gorman later told Guardian Australia that the event raised more than $1,000 for the Prostate Cancer Foundation of Australia. I knew that it got banned in Melbourne, but I had hoped Sydney University would be a place that was more accepting of free speech and alternative ideas, she said. All I really wanted to do was have a discussion about legitimate male issues.  One she was particularly passionate about was domestic violence not being a single gender issue. Thats something I really want to pioneer: it needs to stop being stop violence against women, she said. It needs to be stop violence, full stop.     The Red Pill screening prompted heated debate at Sydney University. Photograph: Elle Hunt for the Guardian    Support for female victims of domestic violence is described as a half-a-billion dollar industry in The Red Pill. Some of the views put forward by Paul Elam of the blog A Voice For Men she said went a little bit too far when feminism was not the cause of all mens issues  but she empathised with the sympathetic stance of the documentary maker, Cassie Jaye.  Gorman defined herself as both a classical liberal and a libertarian and equity feminist, pointing to the work of Christina Hoff Sommers, the American author of Who Stole Feminism. It was easy to feel alienated by the movement, which she said had exaggerated some problems for women at the expense of real female issues such as female genital mutilation and child brides. But, Gorman added: Even if I said I wasnt a feminist, it doesnt mean Im a sexist. Just as its bad to stereotype feminists as all being extreme man haters, its bad to stereotype MRAs as being women haters. Silence their views isnt the right way to be going about this. We should be working together, I think. Gorman had invited those who opposed the screening to come along, watch it all the way through, and then have a debate. Their response had been to call her and her fellow organisers sexists and bigots, and tear down posters advertising the event. This is Sydney University, its not Berkeley  were not going to let alternative views be silenced just because people are offended, she said. There are a lot of things that I find on campus offensive, like putting up posters of Che Guevara, who murdered thousands of people  but I wouldnt stop the socialists doing that. The two-hour film was more confused than it was hostile, proffering statistics of US military war deaths and the women and children first policy anecdotally observed in water disasters as evidence of the expendability of male lives. Individuals protracted, specific, and in some cases bizarre, experiences of custody battles and paternity tests were put forward as evidence of the diminution of all men. The audience watched on mostly passively, perking up only when the documentary depicted protests like the one they could still hear going on outside the auditorium doors. RACIST, SEXIST, ANTI-GAY  MRA, GO AWAY, chanted protesters at a mens rights rally in Toronto in 2013. I recognise that! yelled someone at the back, to much laughter. The film concluded with Jaye not-quite swallowing the red pill, finding the reality of the mens rights movement to be somewhere in the middle  but renouncing her feminism all the same. The credits rolled, the lights came up and Gorman opened the floor to questions and comments. One man was quick to respond. I think whats really important is that, when we walk away from this ... we try and find out whats the truth, whats real, and we dont descend to the level of hate and fear that is on that side of the door. Its just very, very important. If we go back the other way, this just keeps going backwards and forwards, and no one gets anywhere."
"88""Frances centrist president, Emmanuel Macron, has appointed a prime minister from the right to lead his bid for a parliamentary majority in Junes elections and push through his plans to loosen strict labour laws. 
douard Philippe, 46, the mayor of the Normandy port town Le Havre, comes from Les Rpublicains, the party that was headed by Nicolas Sarkozy until last year and whose candidate, Franois Fillon, was knocked out in the first round of the presidential election. 
Philippe supported Alain Jupp, the moderate, centre-right former prime minister, in the partys presidential primary race last year. 
 
  Related: Emmanuel Macron races to train would-be MPs  
 
His appointment is seen as a strategic move by the French president to destabilise the already divided French right and win over rightwing politicians to his La Rpublique en Marche (La REM) movement. 
Macron, who served as economy minister under the Socialist former president Franois Hollande, has attracted dozens of centre-left MPs to his new movement and needed to reach out to the right. The move was also calculated to lure parliamentary hopefuls from Les Rpublicains as a way of securing the majority he needs to enact his manifesto promises to provide more flexibility for business. 
Taking office at the grandiose prime ministers residence of Le Htel Matignon, Philippe stated pointedly: I am a man of the right, but added that he respected politicians on the left and was driven by the greater good. 
His appointment is a blow to Les Rpublicains, who have been trying to regroup after the presidential vote and prevent defections to Macrons camp.  
Party officials insisted Philippes move was strictly a personal decision, but about 20 MPs broke ranks and issued a statement urging Les Rpublicains and centre-right allies to accept Macrons outstretched hand, saying the right needed to take the full measure of the political transformation taking place before their eyes. 
 video\" data-video-provider=\"Reuters\"> 
  
  
  
   
  
 
  Emmanuel Macrons inauguration speech: the world needs a strong France
  
 
Philippe was born in Rouen in Normandy and based his political career in Le Havre, where his grandfather was a docker. The son of two teachers, he speaks German and spent part of his childhood in Bonn when his father was the headteacher of the French lyce. He comes from the same university background as Macron: he studied at Pariss prestigious, political science institute, Sciences Po, then attended the exclusive cole Nationale dAdministration, the civil service graduate school seen as a factory of the French elite. 
As a student, Philippe was briefly a social democrat activist within the French Socialist party before moving to the right. He has never held a government post and is relatively little-known outside his fiefdom in the north, which helps Macron present him as a new face as part of his promise to renew politics. 
Philippe has veered between politics and the private sector including working for an American law firm and holding a senior position at the French nuclear company Areva.  
The French left and the Greens reacted to the appointment by saying he was too rightwing and not focused enough on green issues, citing his time working in the nuclear industry. The government lineup, which will be announced on Tuesday, will show exactly what importance Macron intends to place on environmental issues. 
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
Philippe has co-authored two novels set in the political sphere. One, published 10 years ago, described the French prime ministers office and residence of Matignon as a type of hell: golden, sought after by many and satisfying for the ego, but hell nonetheless. He described a prime minister quickly submerged and drowning under a mass of information. 
Although he has been a longstanding advocate of what Macron has defined as a new form of pragmatic neither left nor right politics, Philippe was sometimes critical during the campaign in columns written for the leftwing daily Libration. He said Macron had impressed with his power of seduction and reformist rhetoric but that it was wrong to compare him to John F Kennedy who had more charisma. 
As a member of parliament for Normandy, Philippe abstained during the vote to legalise same-sex marriage in France in 2013, and the feminist group Osez Le Fminisme has complained that he abstained in 2014 on a vote for a sweeping gender equality law. 
Macron is now under pressure to ensure that he fulfils his promise to appoint more women to senior positions in the new government. Macron said half of the ministers would be women but his key cabinet and senior advisor positions in the Elyse, announced on Sunday, were all men."
"89""Emmanuel Macron rallied his amateur army of would-be MPs on Saturday hours before his investiture as Frances youngest president. The new leader visited the Muse du Quai Branly to give the troops  as his spokeswomen called them  a pep talk. Of the 428 people chosen to stand as candidates for Macrons La Rpublique En Marche (Republic on the Move, or La REM) party for next months parliamentary elections, 52% are new to politics and have never held elected office.   Related: Macron to visit Germany to seek support for a beefed up eurozone    They were being given a crash course on how to run an election campaign, organise and motivate a team and deal with the press at a seminar to which journalists were not invited. Macron was driven straight past waiting cameras and journalists anxious to question him on his falling-out with the veteran centrist Franois Bayrou over candidate selection for the coming poll. Macron, who needs a parliamentary majority to push through his programme of reforms, has promised to field candidates in all but one of Frances 577 constituencies; the exception is Manuel Vallss constituency, where La REM is not putting anyone up against the former Socialist prime minister. On Sunday morning, Macron will mount the steps of the Elyse Palace, see his predecessor Franois Hollande off the premises and begin his daunting task. The path to the presidential palace began 13 months ago in Macrons home town of Amiens in northern France when he launched En Marche!, as his party was originally called, billed as neither right nor left but transpartisan. Macron, in an open-necked shirt, addressed a handpicked audience. He admitted it was a radical idea and frankly a bit mad. Socialists and rightwingers lined up to agree. At the time, Valls described it as absurd, others said it was idiotic.     Macrons La REM is not putting a candidate up against the former Socialist prime minister Manuel Valls, right, in the June parliamentary election. Photograph: Philippe Wojazer/Reuters    Political analysts predicted he was just angling for a safe parliamentary seat; hes a man in a hurry, said radio commentator Alain Duhamel. Others mocked: En Marche! But wheres he going? Nobody gave much serious thought to him becoming president this time around. Most French leaders  the majority of them, like Macron, graduates of the cole Nationale dAdministration, the elite hothouse for the countrys political class  reach the pinnacle and pull up the ladder. Macron, who promised to refresh Frances political scene with new blood and new faces, has lowered it and invited motivated members of the public to join him in power. His first task on Monday will be to name a prime minister  the identity of whom, despite frenzied speculation, is still a mystery. The PM will then appoint ministers. If Macron fails to obtain an outright majority in the parliamentary elections on 11 and 18 June, he will almost certainly have to replace some of his first choices. Without a convincing majority  or, worse, faced with a hostile opposition majority  Macron will be unlikely to fulfil his election pledges, particularly the more controversial ones. He has pledged to lower corporation tax, reorganise the pension system, make labour laws more flexible, slash public spending and shrink the civil service by 120,000 posts. Less than a week after his election, there is an atmosphere of barely contained chaos in the La REM camp. The row with Bayrou has already struck a jarring note.   Related: Ex-bullfighter and maths genius among candidates standing for Macron    The veteran centrist was one of the first leading politicians to rally to Macron, setting his own presidential ambitions aside. We got him elected, Bayrou told journalists last week. Bayrou claimed that his MoDem party has not been allotted enough winnable parliamentary seats. The president-elect was, he said, effectively operating a recycling operation involving the Socialist party. On Friday evening, after hasty talks, Bayrou announced that a solid and balanced agreement had been struck, but Macron made no comment. Christophe Castaner, one of Macrons close advisers, told journalists everything is fine between the two but insisted there would be no electoral deals or candidates imposed on La REM. Macron has to find another 148 candidates before the end of the week. The argument has been greeted with schadenfreude from the conservative Les Rpublicains who, despite the humiliating failure of their candidate Franois Fillon to get past the first-round presidential vote, are regrouping in the hope of forming a parliamentary majority to block Macron. Its members lined up to accuse La REM of amateurism. Introducing La REMs wannabe MPs Richard Ferrand, the partys general secretary, said the aim was to build a majority of change. There were five criteria, he added: Renewal, gender equality, probity, pluralism and coherence. Never before has a French political movement that has only been in existence for 13 months had the audacity to present 52% of candidates who are people with no professional political CV or any political history, Ferrand told journalists last week. The first published list, which includes company bosses and shop owners, doctors and nurses, lawyers and judges, teachers, professors, farmers, a wine maker, two fire officers and a former bullfighter, contained at least half a dozen errors, and had to be hastily corrected. Ferrand insisted that the 148 vacancies would be filled before Fridays registration deadline and hoped they would lead to a recomposition of the political landscape. That message was intended for the ears of Les Rpublicains: for La REM to claim to be not right nor left, as Macron insists, it needs some heavyweights from the right who are Macron-friendly. Pascal Perrineau, head of the Sciences Po universitys political research institute, Cevipof, says the challenge facing Macrons untried and inexperienced army should not be understated. France likes its politicians well-seasoned, he said, and while the idea of the sympathetic amateur was charming, Macron would need to find some professionals to reassure the electorate. This is when things get hard, Perrineau said. We have a saying in France: he has eaten his white bread first; now he will have to eat his black bread. It will not be easy. If, against all odds and predictions, Macron succeeds, he will have journeyed from Amiens to the Elyse in just 13 months, creating in the process a political party that can drum up more than 500 potential MPs. By any standards it will be an extraordinary and historic political feat. There remains an awful lot to do, but as Macron liked to say during his presidential campaign: Only those who try have problems."
"90""Church of England bishops are being cowed by a small group of super-conservative puritans who believe homosexuality is a sin, leaving most too scared to speak out in support of gay and lesbian clergy and parishioners, according a leading gay vicar who is quitting the priesthood. Andrew Foreshew-Cain, the only gay vicar in the church to have spoken publicly about his marriage, told his congregations this week he was leaving the ranks of clergy after 27 years because institutional homophobia prevented him from getting another job. Foreshew-Cain said a handful of homosexual bishops were in relationships, and at least 20 clergy had quietly married same-sex partners against C of E rules. The church permits clergy to be in same-sex relationships that are celibate, but forbids clergy from entering into same-sex marriages. If its truly OK to be gay and celibate in the C of E, and all these bishops are gay and celibate, why arent they open about their lives? It would make a tremendous difference to the LGBT community in the C of E and beyond, and would show integrity both in them as individuals and in the church, Foreshew-Cain said. But bishops are too scared about what would be done to them  people on the conservative wing would attack them so vigorously. The conservatives have been given so much freedom and weight. The number of super-conservative puritans is relatively small but, for fear of them, they have been given a weight of influence and regard way beyond their numbers. He said there was a perverse integrity in conservative Christians who genuinely believe Im going to hell because of their reading of scripture. But I have no sympathy for bishops who privately say: Actually, I really support you and I want to see a church in which we can celebrate gay and lesbian relationships, but I cant say that in public because Ill get attacked for it. They hide behind a call to unity [within the church], but they are collaborating with homophobia and hurt. And, sadly, thats true of most bishops. The only bishop to have publicly acknowledged his homosexuality is Nicholas Chamberlain, bishop of Grantham, who spoke to the Guardian last September after a Sunday newspaper threatened to publicise his relationship. At the time the archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, said he was fully aware of Chamberlains relationship when he consecrated him. Why doesnt the church mention his relationship in his biography [as it routinely does with heterosexual bishops]? Even if someone is fully compliant with the rules [on celibacy], it cant be spoken about in honest terms. Its conscious concealment, said Foreshew-Cain, a member of the general synod, the churchs ruling body. He said the C of Es attitudes towards gay and lesbian people was profoundly harmful and damaging. The people who run the church need to be called out on institutional homophobia and held accountable for what theyre doing, because theyre doing it knowingly. He added: Justin Welby is a good man trying to do an extraordinarily difficult job. But there is a huge disjuncture between what the bishops are saying and doing and what people in the pews say and do. The bishops authority is constantly undermined by their current position. I dont think the bishops have realised that were living in an era where people outside the church see themselves as more moral and ethical than the church on these issues of gender and sexuality  and, indeed, race  and theyre judging the church on the basis of its behaviours on these issues. If youre an organisation that preaches ethics and morals, thats really damaging. Foreshew-Cain will leave his parishes of St Mary with All Souls, Kilburn, and St James in West Hampstead this summer and move to the north-west of England where his husband, Stephen, whom he married in 2014, is now working. The two London parishes have a reputation for inclusivity and acceptance, built over almost two decades while Foreshew-Cain has been their vicar. These parishes are beacons of hope for a lot of people. I told the congregations they have to be alert to defending what makes these places special. There will be people who want to destroy that after Ive gone, he said. He felt his warning was pragmatic and realistic. Forewarned is forearmed. I dont think the official C of E is particularly comfortable with the inclusive and progressive stance these parishes have taken. The appointment of the next priest will be crucial. Foreshew-Cain has had solid support from his congregations since his marriage. His diocese issued an informal rebuke but no action was taken. However, he says he was told he would not be licensed to a ministry elsewhere. He denied he was giving up his high-profile campaign for equality within the church. I am a faithful Anglican, I am a priest, I will continue going to church and will join a community. Im not throwing in the towel, Im not going to stop campaigning and raising my voice, he said. But I also have a tremendous sense of relief at no longer working for an organisation which is so grudging in its acceptance and consciously discriminatory in its attitudes. He feared for the future of the church he genuinely loves, saying it would be judged by the completeness of its moral compass and not by the things it does that are good while continuing to abuse a minority. He added: The C of E as a national force and a majority church in this country is coming to an end. People are walking away, and will continue to walk away. But we have a choice about the future. Do we want to be a narrow, conservative, antagonistic sect or welcoming, highly regarded and seen as a force for good in society? Thats the choice were faced with."
"91""When the sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, was a junior lawyer in the early 1990s, she noticed slightly older women disappearing from the office. They had left to have children and never returned, and the legal profession was happy to see them go. Anyone who could not make a blind commitment to the 24/7 hours and fast pace demanded by top-tier law firms had no place in the company. And anyway, everyone knew women were happier at home with the children. That was 25 years ago. In a speech for the Raising the Bar series hosted by law firm Mills Oakley, Jenkins told a largely female audience of legal professionals in Melbourne on Friday that in 2017 the rhetoric and policies had changed but the culture of many firms remained the same.  Australia as a whole was more fixated than most countries on this idea that a good mother stays home and a good man goes to work and is a full-time breadwinner, Jenkins said. She blamed that attitude for the staggering gap between the education of women  Australia was ranked equal first in the World Economic Forums global gender gap report in 2016  and the countrys overall ranking of 46th.   Related: Australian report finds disturbing evidence of gender inequality    For women who return to work after 12 months full time, I havent met a women who hasnt said I was questioned why I was doing that,  Jenkins said. The underlying expectation is a women should stay home and also should be compromising their career, and that if theyre at work, even full time, theyre not fully focused. Ive got ...many anecdotes but my personal experience was the same ... I was told, basically, Dont worry about this, love. Youll probably fall in love with your baby and want to stay home. And its like, well of course Im going to fall in love with my baby, but I felt like my career was dripping. Jenkins made the comment in response to a senior female barrister who had asked, with the kind of controlled anger that is probably terrifying in the courtroom, why people kept congratulating her husband for knowing how to bake a cake. I work seven days a week and my husband is doing his doctorate, she said. People ask me who is looking after the children when Im at court, people ask me how many days a week I work, and people ask him, How do you do it? Youre so amazing! You can cook a cake and you can look after children! The barrister was just a little bit fed up with the gendered assumptions and the expectations and pressures placed on men and women to fit their given roles. I think this is a major problem, Jenkins said. Its also a major problem for men: men want to engage as parents, and children are better off when theyve got parents who are engaged in their work but also with them. Jenkins had begun the talk with an anecdote about being approached by a male lawyer at dinner one night who demanded to know why Australia had not achieved gender equality. Later, at the same dinner, she had spoken to his wife, who had revealed that while her husband had made partner she had dropped down to working two days a week  despite starting at the same law firm  to care for their five-year-old twins.   Related: The Inequality Project: the Guardian's in-depth look at our unequal world    This is no longer about a bad guy, Jenkins said. There are an accumulation of circumstances; there are social norms that lead peoples lives in a particular way. Those social norms could demonstrably not be shifted by workplaces implementing policies and complaints procedures for sexual harassment and discrimination, Jenkins said, because those policies had been in place for 25 years and equality had still not been achieved. It was also not simply a matter of education. Young women in Australia are among the most educated people in the world, a fact Jenkins said makes our [global] position on economic participation and opportunity even more devastating. We get these women all the way to the top, we prove that we are fantastic, and then we plummet, she said. Jenkins said Australia needed to confront the underlying belief  held by half of all Australian men and a quarter of Australian women according to most research  that gender equality was no longer a problem.  While its not open dinner party conversation, my experience in organisations is there is a very quiet resistance to any change, and the fact is change doesnt happen because people actually think bringing in initiatives to advance women is discrimination against men, she said. She quoted a phrase, popularised on social media and now widely available as a T-shirt: Equal rights for others does not mean less rights for you. Its not pie. While discrimination in the workplace was no longer enshrined in law, as it was 50 years ago, or overt as it was 25 years ago in the form of regular sexual harassment at the photocopier or Friday night drinks, Jenkins said, there were still a lot of people who are very happy with how the status quo is working and who are not actually very interested in change. Generational change should have happened in my generation, and it hasnt, she said."
"92""One of the bodies responsible for naming sporting arenas in Victoria, Melbourne and Olympic Parks, has said it does not support homophobic comments made by former Australian tennis great Margaret Court. But the organisation declined to respond to questions about a push to rename Margaret Court arena, or to confirm whether discussions had been held with the other organisation responsible for arena naming rights, Tennis Australia. Melbourne and Olympic Parks does not support Margaret Courts comments and we remain an organisation committed to embracing equality, diversity and inclusion; from our fans to our colleagues who deliver the events that people love to attend, it said.    Related: Yes, Margaret Court, lesbians can rise to the top in tennis. Other sports, too | Kate O'Halloran    Tennis Australia did not respond to questions about the controversy, including whether it had received any complaints about Courts remarks. This week Court, who won a record 24 singles championships at grand slam tournaments and who is now a conservative pastor in Perth, said tennis was full of lesbians and transgender children were the work of the devil. Last week she said in a letter to the West Australian she was disappointed that Qantas has become an active promoter for same-sex marriage and vowed to stop flying with the airline whenever possible. Her comments escalated in the following days. She told Vision Christian Radio station: Tennis is full of lesbians because even when I was playing there was only a couple there, but those couple that led took young ones into parties and things. She said LGBTI people were confused and blamed activists for sexuality and gender confusion in children, which she described as the devil. Thats what Hitler did and thats what communism did  it got to the mind of the children, she said. And theres a whole plot in our nation, and in the nations of the world, to get to the minds of the children. Court has long held anti-LGBTI views, but her recent comments come as support for marriage equality in Australia is strong, at 62% in 2016. There have been calls led by 18-time grand slam singles title-holder Martina Navratilova to rename Margaret Court arena.  It is now clear exactly who Court is: an amazing tennis player, and a racist and a homophobe, Navratilova wrote in an open letter to the arena. Her vitriol is not just an opinion. She is actively trying to keep LGBT people from getting equal rights (note to Court: we are human beings, too). She is demonising trans kids and trans adults everywhere. She suggested the court be renamed after another former tennis great, Evonne Goolagong Cawley. Although Melbourne &amp; Olympic Parks and Tennis Australia are responsible for naming arenas, the Victorian government is also consulted. Last year the premier, Daniel Andrews, announced $15m to develop Australias first pride centre to serve as a hub for LGBTI groups and organisations. He also appointed an equality minister, Martin Foley, and was the first premier to march in a pride parade.   Related: Margaret Court, Hamou and Nastase  will tennis ever escape the dark ages? | Kevin Mitchell    In 2015, Andrews announced Victorias first gender and sexuality commissioner, Rowena Allen. The premier has yet to weigh in on the debate about a name change, and was unavailable for comment when Guardian Australia contacted his office on Friday. A spokeswomen said: Margaret Courts comments are offensive and wrong. Victoria prides itself on being an inclusive and welcoming place  and nothing will change that. Victorias equal opportunity and human rights commissioner, Kristen Hilton, said sport was an important part of culture and could provide health benefits, happiness and a sense of belonging. In 2015 the commission launched Australias first guidelines on trans and gender-diverse inclusion in sport.  It would be deeply disappointing if the comments of a former athlete deter young LGBTI people from getting involved in sport or make them feel excluded, she said. While Margaret Court certainly has the right to express her views, it is important to consider the impact of those views on people from the LGBTI community and their friends and family who should be spared potentially hurtful and discriminatory comments from an esteemed public figure, Hilton said."
"93""The walk from the Gare du Nord across the Seine to Frances centre of power, a string of buildings off the Quai dOrsay, takes a pleasant, circuitous hour: the route is a tourists dream. But for Marlne Schiappa, Frances freshly appointed gender equality minister, the streets of Paris are the frontline in a war between the sexes. Where I see boutiques and fruit and vegetable stalls, cafes and splendid architecture, Schiappas eye is drawn instead to the idling men ogling young women; to the handsome displays in every pharmacy window advertising weight-loss solutions  Minceur Th Vert (Slimming Green Tea), Ventre Plat (Flat Stomach  and illustrated by pictures of delighted young women using a tape measure as a skipping rope. France is paradoxical, Schiappa tells me. We are the country of Simone de Beauvoir, of feminist theory and philosophy. But we are also a Latin country with entrenched stereotypes. She greets me warmly in what must have once been a grand dining room; the parliamentary district in the 7th arrondissement has not changed much since its vast mansions were built for nobility in the 18th century. It is the day before Theresa May will meet Emmanuel Macron, Frances youngest ever president, who assumed office on 14 May. At 39, with no campaigning experience, Macron has surrounded himself with young cabinet members who are new to politics, as a way of making a clean break with his socialist predecessor Francois Hollande. This week he made businesswomen Florence Parly minister for the armed forces (defence for four of the EUs five largest economies is now overseen by women); he has appointed TV presenter Nicolas Hulot as environmental and social transition minister (the equivalent of Theresa May giving David Attenborough a cabinet post). But Macrons most contentious appointment is Schiappa, at 34 the youngest member of his cabinet, whom he has put in charge of equality between men and women, with a brief to tackle the gender pay gap and improve women rights in the workplace. A former advertising executive-turned-author, shes best known as a campaigner and blogger, and has outraged Frances right wing with her unapologetic feminism. She shows me into her airy, high-ceilinged office where we sit on new modern chairs, her replacement for the stuffy furniture that used to be here. This is the room where Schiappa has begun hauling in public figures to call them out on sexist behaviour (and then tweet about whether the meeting ended satisfactorily). She wears gold hoop earrings, her long, thick hair pulled back in a loose knot, and is friendly and straightforward in a way thats still rare in top-level politics. Schiappa says that Macron did particularly well with female voters in the presidential elections. Why does she think that is? He was the first to say, Im a feminist. Second, because he believes in parity in parliament. Exactly half his cabinet is female. Plus, she says, unlike other politicians, he went out and listened to people. Really listened.    I think we realise that we need real people, not concepts or abstractions. This is real life  we tell it like it is    Schiappas first goal is to tackle sexual harassment on the street. Its a huge phenomenon in France. Its that moment when a man is walking behind a women, talking to her, and the women can do nothing, because shes alone. She doesnt scream for help, because she thinks, Its not that bad, Ill walk, Ill escape. Men feel its acceptable: theyre being the French lover. Women are molested on public transport so frequently, Schiappa says, that many will dress in ways to avoid it before they use the Mtro or bus. Its enough of a problem that the previous government launched an anti-harassment campaign called Stop: Thats Enough to encourage people to report any incidents. In France, if a women is sexually assaulted, her first thought is, Now Im dirty and no one will ever want to marry me  the social responsibility of the victim. Her solution is on-the-spot fines. Macron has pledged to expand the police force by 10,000 over the next five years: why not give them powers to police sexism in the same way they do smokers who drop their cigarettes? Twenty euros would be a bit humiliating, 5,000 would be more of a deterrent. At the moment, many men are saying, Its not a big deal, were only having fun. And we say, No. She says shell be nailing down a precise strategy with the justice secretary soon. Schiappa intends to take a similarly radical approach to closing the pay gap. In France, women earn between 12% and 27% less than men, depending on sector. Her proposal is that major companies will be invited to consult privately with the government on solutions. Those who refuse will be named and shamed. She is also keen to discuss what she describes as Frances culture of rape. Minimising rape or finding excuses, she clarifies, before offering an example. The former vice president of the National Assembly, Denis Baupin, has been accused by eight women of sexual assault and he wasnt fired. Baupin denies the allegations, some of which date back 15 years, and has quit his role after pressure from politicians and the press. No charges were brought because the statute of limitations had expired (in France, it is just three years for sexual harassment cases).   ne Schiappa and Emmanuel Macron on public transport in Le Mans\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Marlne Schiappa and Emmanuel Macron on public transport in Le Mans, October 2016. Photograph: Chamussy/Sipa/Rex/Shutterstock    The French media does not help, Schiappa says: You never say the word rapist in an article in France. You say, A women has been raped or A women who claims to have been raped. They never say, A man raped a women. Its to hide the rapist. Its victim-blaming. Another part of Schiappas brief is to tackle homophobia  a huge task, as illustrated by a meeting she had last week at the town hall in Le Mans. I was talking about a proposal around LGBT rights, and one man, an elected official from the far right, said, You forgot the Z. I asked him what he meant. LGBTZ, he said. Z stands for zoophile. The official ended up making a donation to a LGBT association. As minister for equality, its business as usual for me. Theyre everywhere. Theres no need to insult them in return. We have to fight them and defend our ideas, but more loudly. *** Schiappa first entered politics in 2014, when she stood as a candidate in the municipal elections in Le Mans, her home suburb. She was elected and became deputy mayor, in charge of gender equality and a technology project. The following year, she met Macron, then minister of the economy under Hollande, at a French technology event. She says she met him on only 13 more occasions before the government job was hers. In the intervening period, she worked in what was then called the Ministry of Family, Children and women Rights, where she drew up a new measure to introduce greater transparency in nursery applications (the French system is riddled with corruption; waiting lists are long and there are widespread accusations of bribery and favouritism). When Macron launched his presidential campaign last August, Schiappa was quick to support him. Schiappa is Corsican, and grew up in a multiracial council estate north of Paris. She has said she became a feminist at 13 when she realised how, unlike her father (a leftwing historian), she was unable to walk the streets unharassed; she and other women in the neighbourhood would plan self-defence strategies. Her father showed her how to make a knuckle-duster out of her house keys. She now has two daughters aged 10 and five; her husband (whom she keeps out of the public eye) co-wrote some of her books. When she had her first daughter, she was working in advertising. The women around me, they had one, two, three children; they were in meetings really late in the day. I was asking, How do you do this? How do you look after your children when you are working that hard? I think working mothers has been a big subject in the United Kingdom for a long time, but in France it was not. There was no ministry of women rights at the time, and it was not in the public debates. I began the blog [Maman Travaille] and then set up a support network of working mothers, to talk and to put together proposals for politics and companies.    When you are a women from the suburbs, and you are young, and you are to the left of politics, youre unacceptable    The blog was a hit, in part because the head of Yahoo in France had children, loved it and promoted it online. Word spread; Schiappa was interviewed in French Elle, in Madame Figaro. She left advertising to spend more time with her daughter, then began writing novels. She joined another ad agency, but got pregnant again, so I left. She wrote more, expanding her repertoire to non-fiction books on motherhood and feminism; titles include Letters To My Uterus and Who Are The Rapists? A novel she published in 2014, No More Than Four Hours Sleep A Night, is being turned into a film. Schiappa debated Marine Le Pen in 2012, at a symposium arranged by French Elle. She was talking about what the extreme right called comfort abortion  she invented the expression  saying there were women having abortions 10 or 12 times a year and that the state  poor white people  was paying for it. The French far right is known for its racism and xenophobia, but less is said about its misogyny. Marine Le Pen wanted to stop state-funding for abortions, Schiappa says. Two members of parliament wrote a proposal to ban women from working. When you are a women who is from the suburbs, and you are young, and you are to the left of politics, youre unacceptable. But the radical right has insulted every single women before me. How does she think a women rose to the top of such a misogynistic party? Two reasons, Schiappa says: Because she adopts a masculine style. She speaks loudly  shes yelling, shes screaming; she wants to humiliate the people she is talking to. And because its a family business. If you are a women and your name is not Le Pen, you cannot have a career in the Front National. Its family before women rights.   ne Schiappa in her office.\" width=\"800\" height=\"1000\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Schiappa in her office. Photograph: Emmanuel Fradin for the Guardian    Of all Macrons new cabinet members, Schiappa has drawn the nastiest criticism. The right wing is especially irritated by her views on Frances sexually predatory and chauvinistic male culture. Critics dislike her plans to introduce state maternity cover for self-employed women, and to make artificial insemination available for lesbian, older and single women (its currently available only for heterosexual couples). They are squeamish about other campaigns: earlier this year, she was part of a group that said French mothers are being treated as criminals for choosing to bottlefeed rather than breastfeed. Some have seized on one of her more light-hearted books about motherhood, in which she advised women how to prolong maternity leave (humorously, she says): Make yourself ugly, come across as traumatised, exaggerate everything; she was encouraging women to defraud the state, her critics argued. She has not escaped censure from the left, either  accused of being a masculiniste (anti-feminist) for a book she wrote more than a decade ago in praise of the sexual power of overweight women. In the three articles Le Figaro publish about Schiappa in the week I meet her, they claim, variously, that she is the women to save French politics; that she has an adolescents addiction to social media; and that she is a tl-feministe for posting an online video interviewing women in Paris about their experiences of sexual harassment. But the Fachosphre [the fascist internet] and its appendages can continue their neverending flow of hate, Schiappa tweeted last week. It will never stop me from working! She is frustrated that some of the cultural myths about French women persist: that they dont get fat; that French babies sleep through the night; that French toddlers dont throw food. All of that is not true, Schiappa says, rankled. But we hear it everywhere. Of course French women are all different weights, and weight is a factor of discrimination. What the bestsellers on French women and their supposed perfection totally miss, she says, is Frances sexist way of life. She says that married women are still expected to abide by their devoir conjugal, or conjugal duty to have sex. Sexism travels top down: Ccile Duflot [a Green politician] was catcalled in the National Assembly because she was wearing a dress with flowers on it. The attitude, even at the very top is, Cest la vie.   ne Schiappa (back row, second from left) with members of Macrons new government.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Schiappa (back row, second from left) with members of Macrons new government. Photograph: Philippe Wojazer/AFP/Getty Images    Schiappa supports the ban on religious clothing in schools, but has also argued that mothers should be permitted to enter school grounds in a veil, otherwise they would be ostracised from their childrens education (they are now allowed to by law). But she warns against too much religious tolerance. Feminism can be obstructed by the banner of anti-racism. For example, how people denied what happened in Cologne [when there were large-scale sexual assaults on New Years Eve 2015]. Feminism cant have ideological barriers. Will her brief include Muslim communities? You know, in France, we dont think about communities. We are a revolutionary French Rpublique. There is just one community. This is a French law, the separation between church and state. Its a statement that I doubt is widely shared across France. When she was a freelancer, scarce childcare meant Schiappa would often take her children to meetings. As deputy mayor, she made a point of leaving work punctually at 4pm to do the school run. At first, I said to myself, Oh my God, Im rude. Then women came to say, Thank you for doing that, because now we are doing the same thing. So I think, if you have the power to make these things visible, you must, because other people will benefit. When youre on a salary, its hard to tell your boss or colleagues, Hey, Im bringing my child to the meeting. But I used my power because I get to decide. Schiappa is concerned with domestic equality, too, she says. We started with public life, and now we have to change professional and private life. People dont want the state to enter the home and tell men to wash the dishes. But gender equality is good for men, she argues. Many fathers dont take their 11 days paternity leave, because they are afraid of losing their jobs. Macron has acted quickly on his pledge to create equality in parliament: he fielded equal numbers of male and female candidates in this months election, and appointed a gender-balanced cabinet, with 11 of 22 posts taken by women. Last weekends elections returned the highest ever number of female politicians (38.5% of the seats). We have a female minister of sport who is a former champion [fencer Laura Flessel holds the record for the most medals won by a French female Olympian]. And Im glad we have a women as defence minister, because I can tell my daughter, You can fight even if you are a women  you can make war, you can make peace, too. Now we have four women for every 10 people in parliament. Before Macron, it was two in 10. More women means its going to be more unacceptable to catcall a women if she wears a flowery dress to work. Half of Macrons new politicians are complete unknowns, reflecting a wider shift in politics in the west. This is a rejection of the establishment that Schiappa is proud to be part of. Yes, more people from civil society are coming into politics, she says. I think we realise that we need real people, not concepts or abstractions. This is real life  we tell it like it is. What does she say to those who say she lacks the political experience to hold a government post? Well, she laughs, I have life experience and I think its quite enough. And we know now that people with political experience dont have much success. The country is not in a good state. So let us try."
"94""Sixteen years after the Netherlands became the first country in the world to pass legislation in favour of gay marriage, Germany has finally followed suit. The answer to why it took so long is that much of Germany remains conservative at heart. While Angela Merkel has helped create the impression of her country as a liberal democracy, aided by issues such as her refugee policy and the decision to dismantle the countrys nuclear power stations, in reality it is steeped in conservative values.  The focus from abroad on Berlin as a tourist destination sometimes gives the impression that the whole country looks like the capital: a party town, a mecca for artists and gay people. But the reality is that large swaths of Germany are staunchly socially conservative. It has one of the widest gender pay gaps in Europe, and there are pockets of deep-seated racism.   Related: German parliament votes to legalise same-sex marriage    The countrys traditionalist nature is underscored by the fact that Merkels CDU has now been the leading party in a grand coalition for the past 12 years, and is likely to be re-elected in September for at least a further five. Public opinion may have moved behind same-sex marriage in recent years  75% of those who responded to a recent poll said they supported marriage equality  but the ruling CDU has consistently blocked a vote in parliament on the issue. Even on Friday, some of the more conservative members of the CDU invoked the constitution in defending marriage as a union between a man and a women. For liberals who hold Merkel up as something of a heroine, her no vote is a reminder that she still has a strong conservative base to play to, and that she remains true to her strict upbringing.  Merkel has religious roots: her father was a protestant pastor seminary on the edge of the old market town of Templin in eastern Germany. Her personality, her views on Europe and her attitude to crisis could all be said to have been shaped by her upbringing under communism. She has said her first political memory was of the Berlin Wall being erected in August 1961, and recalled her mother weeping in church on 13 August while her father delivered his weekly sermon from the pulpit.  On Friday, the SPDs Johannes Kahrs accused Merkel of having tripped, Schabowski-like after appearing to trigger yesterdays vote on same sex marriage. Gnter Schabowski was an obscure East German functionary who in the autumn of 1989 delivered the erroneous message that the travel ban on the countrys citizens had been lifted and they could pass through any of its border crossings with immediate effect. With that, he mistakenly opened the Berlin Wall, and ensured his place in cold war history. Historians are just about in agreement that Schabowski, who died in 2015, really did slip up when he stumbled over the words of that infamous politburo memo. But 12 years into her chancellorship, it is hard to see Merkel as someone who would make such a clumsy mistake. Rather, it is much easier to view her as a canny operator who meant to trigger the gay marriage vote all along."
"95""A Rhode Island teacher who became a star on social media after displaying LGBTQ pride in a photograph taken with Donald Trump in the Oval Office also wrote that he wanted to tell the president: Anti-LGBTQ policies have a body count. Nikos Giannopoulos, a special education teacher at the Beacon Charter High School for the Arts in Woonsocket, visited the White House in April with other award-winning teachers. This week, Giannopoulos posted to his Facebook page a photo that shows him next to a smiling Trump, who is seated at the Resolute desk, and first lady Melania Trump, who is standing. Giannopoulos is wearing a rainbow pin and waving a black lace fan.   Related: Victories against Trump are mounting. Here's how we deal the final blow | Rebecca Solnit    By Friday the picture had been shared thousands of times. The caption included three rainbow emojis and said: Rhode Island Teacher of the Year 2017 meets the 45th President of the United States. Thats all.  However, in a post to his page on 29 April, three days after the White House visit, Giannopoulos went into more detail about his day. His remarks echoed reports in the national press detailing dissatisfaction among the teachers and their families about the way the White House conducted the visit. On Wednesday [26 April], he wrote, when I met the president  I did not know what to expect.   The man seated at the desk read prepared remarks from a sheet of paper and made some comments about CEOs and which states he loved based on electoral votes that he had secured. He did not rise from his seat to present the National Teacher of the Year  Sydney Chafee of Massachusetts  with her much deserved award nor did he allow her to speak.  After what amounted to a brief photo op, we were ushered out of the West Wing and back on to the streets of DC. Trump campaigned as a friend to LGBTQ voters and in office he has not pursued any change to the 2015 supreme court ruling, opposed by many conservatives, that made same-sex marriage legal.  However, hardline government figures including vice-president Mike Pence and attorney general Jeff Sessions are viewed with skepticism by LGBTQ campaigners, and the administration has implemented changes to regulations and protections, particularly in education, leaving some activists fearing death by a thousand cuts.   Related: Anti-Trump sentiment permeates LGBT Pride marches across US    Trumps proposed budget included a heavy cut to education spending and his choice for education secretary of Betsy DeVos, a billionaire hardline conservative and advocate of private schooling, has prompted widespread opposition. On Facebook, Giannopoulos wrote that he wore the pin to represent my gratitude for the LGBTQ community and carried the fan to celebrate the joy and freedom of gender nonconformity. Taking pride in queer identity means rejecting the shame imposed upon us by a harsh society. It means opening yourself up to a lifetime of criticism and misunderstanding, but knowing that its worth it to be able to live authentically. Of the White House visit, he added: In previous years state teachers of the year were given the opportunity to speak to the president for a few minutes each.  Had I been given the opportunity, I would have told him that the pride I feel as an American comes from my freedom to be open and honest about who I am and who I love. I would have told him that queer lives matter and anti-LGBTQ policies have a body count."
"96""Four years ago, completely spent, blood transfused into me in a frantic effort to allow me to walk, I lay on a hospital bed having given birth the day before. To the joy of my family, I had brought them a son. Blue balloons foretold a man in the making. Not just the apple of my eye, but the one who would one day open jam jars for me. The hero who would do the DIY and put out the rubbish. He who was born to be strong because he is male. But then, physical strength can be defined in different ways. What I was yet to learn was that, beneath our skin, women bubble with a source of power that even science has yet to fully understand. We are better survivors than men. Whats more, we are born this way.    Women may hold the key to prolonging life  in extremely old age, the gap between the sexes is glaring    Pretty much at every age, women seem to survive better than men, says Steven Austad, an international expert on ageing, and chair of the biology department at the University of Alabama. For almost two decades, he has been studying one of the best-known yet under-researched facts of human biology: that women live longer than men. His longevity database shows that all over the world and as far back as records have been kept, women outlive men by around five or six years. He describes them as being more robust. Robustness, toughness or pure power  whatever its called  this survival ability cracks apart the stereotype. The physically strong women is almost a myth. We gaze upon great female athletes as though theyre other-worldly creatures. Greek legend could only imagine the Amazons, female warriors as powerful as men. They break the laws of nature. No, we everyday women, we have just half the upper body strength of men. We are six inches shorter, depending on where we live. We wield power, but its emotional and intellectual, we tell ourselves. Its not in our bodies. Not so, says Austad. He is among a small cadre of researchers who believe that women may hold the key to prolonging life. In extremely old age, the gap between the sexes becomes a glaring one. According to a tally maintained by the global Gerontology Research Group, today, 43 people around the world are known to be living past the age of 110. Of these supercentenarians, 42 are women. Interviews with the worlds current oldest person, 117-year-old Violet Brown, who lives in Jamaica, reveal she enjoys eating fish and mutton. She once worked as a plantation worker. Her lifestyle betrays few clues as to how she has lived so long. But one factor we know has helped is being a women.     Grey power: 42 of the 43 people over the age of 110 are women. Photograph: Phil Fisk for the Observer    Yet there is bizarrely little research to explain the biology behind this. What scientists do know is that this edge doesnt emerge in later life. It is there from the moment a girl is born. When we were there on the neonatal unit and a boy came out, you were taught that, statistically, the boy is more likely to die, says Joy Lawn, director of the Centre for Maternal, Adolescent, Reproductive, and Child Health at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. She explains that, globally, a million babies die on the day of their birth every year. But if they receive exactly the same level of care, males are statistically at a 10% greater risk than females. What makes baby girls so robust remains mostly a mystery. Research published in 2014 by scientists at the University of Adelaide suggests that a mothers placenta may behave differently depending on the sex of the baby, doing more to maintain the pregnancy and increase immunity against infections. For reasons unknown, girls may be getting an extra dose of survivability in the womb. Wherever it comes from, women seem to be shielded against sickness later on. Cardiovascular disease occurs much earlier in men than women. The age of onset of hypertension [high blood pressure] also occurs much earlier in men than women. And theres a sex difference in the rate of progression of disease, says Kathryn Sandberg, director of the Centre for the Study of Sex Differences in Health, Ageing and Disease at Georgetown University. Austad found that in the United States in 2010, women died at lower rates than men from 12 of the 15 most common causes of death, including cancer and heart disease, when adjusted for age. Of the three exceptions, their likelihood of dying from Parkinsons or stroke was about the same. And they were more likely than men to die of Alzheimers disease. Once I started investigating, I found that women had resistance to almost all the major causes of death, he says.   s oldest person Violet Brown sitting with a care giver either side of her at her home in Jamaica\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Age of reason: Violet Brown, centre, the worlds oldest person, was born in Jamaica in 1900. Photograph: Raymond Simpson/AP    Even when it comes to everyday coughs and colds, women have the advantage. If you look across all the different types of infections, women have a more robust immune response, adds Sandberg. If theres a really bad infection, they survive better. If its about the duration of the infection, women will respond faster. One explanation for this is hormones. Higher levels of oestrogen and progesterone could be protecting women in some way, not only by making our immune systems stronger, but also more flexible. This may help maintain a healthy pregnancy. A womens immune system is more active in the second half of her menstrual cycle, when shes able to conceive. On the downside, a powerful immune response also makes women more susceptible to autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. The body is so good at fighting off infection that it attacks its own cells. And this may explain why women tend to report more pain and sickness than men. This is one of the penalties of being a better survivor. You survive, but maybe not quite as intact as you were before, says Austad. Another factor is simply that men are dying more. Part of the reason there are more women than men around in ill health is to do with the fact that women have survived events that would kill men, so the equivalent men are no longer with us, he adds. When it comes to biological sex difference, though, everything isnt always as it seems. At least some of the gaps in health and survival may be social, reflecting gender behaviour. Women may be more likely to seek medical help, for instance. Men may have less healthy diets or do more dangerous work. Nonetheless, Austad and Sandberg are convinced that nature accounts for a good deal of what we see. If they are right, this raises a deeper scientific conundrum. Our bodies adapted over millennia to our environments. So what could it have been in our evolutionary past that gave the female body a little more of this magical robustness? How and why would one sex have developed a survival edge over the other? Studies of hunter-gatherer societies, who live the way we all may have done before fixed settlements and agriculture, provide a few clues. Many anthropologists studying tribal communities in Africa, South America, Asia and Australia believe early humans lived fairly equal lives, sharing responsibility for food, shelter and raising children. The Flintstones model, with wife at home and husband bringing back the bacon, just doesnt stand up. Instead, the evidence shows that women would have done at least the same physical work as men, but with the added burden of bearing children. Theres a general consensus now that hunting-gathering societies, while not perfectly egalitarian, were less unequal, particularly with regard to gender equality, says Melvin Konner, professor of anthropology at Emory University in Atlanta, who has spent years doing fieldwork with hunter-gatherers in Africa. Because of the scale of the group dynamics, it would be impossible for men to exclude women. The more research that is done, the more this is reinforced. Even hunting  that prototypical male activity  is being recast as a female one, too. Anthropologist Rebecca Bliege Bird, a professor at Pennsylvania State University, offers me the example of the Martu, an aboriginal tribe in Western Australia. When Martu women hunt, one of their favourite prey are feral cats. Its not a very productive activity, but its a chance for women to show off their skill acquisition.     Keep on running: Paula Radcliffe continued to train through her two pregnancies. Photograph: Getty Images    Indeed, women are known to be particularly good at endurance running, notes Marlene Zuk, who runs a lab focusing on evolutionary biology at the University of Minnesota. In her 2013 book Paleofantasy, she writes that women running abilities decline extremely slowly into old age. Theyve been known to go long distances even while pregnant. In 2011, for example, Amber Miller ran the Chicago marathon before giving birth seven hours later. World record holder Paula Radcliffe has trained through two pregnancies. Why, then, are we not all Amazons? Why do we imagine femininity to mean small, waif-like bodies? The lives of most ordinary women, outside the pages of magazines, destroy this notion. Visiting Indias cities, I see female construction workers lining the streets, hauling piles of bricks on their heads to building sites. In Kenya, I meet female security guards everywhere, patrolling offices and hotels. Out in rural areas, there are women doing hard physical labour, often hauling their children in slings. Our ancestors would have done the same. In evolutionary terms, these were the circumstances under which our bodies were forged. For an enormous chunk of early human history, as we migrated through Africa to the rest of the world, women would also have travelled hundreds or thousands of miles, sometimes under extreme environmental conditions. Just reproducing and surviving in these conditions, talk about natural selection! Im told by Adrienne Zihlman, an anthropologist at the University of California, Santa Cruz, when I visit her at her home in San Francisco. Zihlman has dedicated her career to understanding human anatomy, and in particular the evolution of women bodies. Women have to reproduce. That means being pregnant for nine months. Theyve got to lactate. Theyve got to carry these kids. Theres something about being a human female that was shaped by evolution. Theres a lot of mortality along the way that really can account for it. When I gave birth to my son, I did the most physically demanding thing a human can do. Yet I am considered the weaker sex. Zihlman reminds me that my body was made strong by the struggles of countless generations of women who went before. There is something about the female form, the female psyche, just the whole package, that was honed over thousands and thousands, even millions, of years to survive, she smiles. I happen to remember, in that moment, that at home I do all the DIY. Myths and misses: five more things you didnt know about women and men Separate symptoms  Women and men present different symptoms for the same medical conditions. Women are more likely to have insomnia and fatigue in the weeks before they have a heart attack, rather than the chest pain commonly experienced by men. Changes of life  Women in India, Japan and China experience far fewer menopause symptoms than western women who commonly report hot flushes, night sweats, depression and insomnia. Scientists at Kings College London argue this could be due to women lumping together their experience of growing older with the menopause. Casual sex  Women are choosier but not more chaste than men. A study by two German researchers, Andreas Baranowski and Heiko Hecht, found that women want casual sex just as much as men and were as likely as males to have sex with a stranger, as long as it was in a safe environment. Boys toys  A 2010 study by Professor Melissa Hines at the University of Cambridge found that girls on average were genetically predisposed to prefer dolls while boys liked to play with mechanical toys such as trains. Risky business  Testosterone is associated with higher levels of optimism, rather than aggression. Saliva samples taken from traders on the London Stock Exchange confirmed they had higher than average testosterone levels. Scientists from Britain, the USA and Spain concluded this increase made the traders more optimistic so more likely to take big financial risks. Inferior: How Science Got Women Wrong  and the New Research Thats Rewriting the Story by Angela Saini is published by Fourth Estate at 12.99. To order a copy for 11.04, go to bookshop.theguardian.com Main photograph: Acrobats JD and Nikki; Stylist Hope Lawrie; special effects make-up Julia Bowden "
"97""Proposals to streamline the process of changing gender have been unveiled by the government, as part of an attempt to boost equality for the LGBT community.   Related: Pride in London crowds celebrate 50 years since decriminalisation of homosexuality    It will also become easier for gay men to give blood under the plans, unveiled by the women and equalities minister, Justine Greening. Her department will undertake a nationwide survey of the LGBT community, which will be used to inform future plans to boost equality. The measures are announced before the 50th anniversary of the partial decriminalisation of homosexuality under the Sexual Offences Act 1967. An attempt to speed up and de-medicalise the process for changing gender will be the main element of a consultation on the laws that underpin gender transition, enshrined in the Gender Recognition Act. Current rules mean that a diagnosis of gender dysphoria is required to begin the process, while individuals have to provide evidence that they have been in transition for at least two years before they can apply to legally change their gender. Meanwhile, the period after which men can donate blood after having sex with a man will be reduced from a year to three months. The reduction was decided after independent medical advice. It followed improvements to tests for various blood infections such as as HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C or syphilis. A national survey will aim to consult 1.5 million LGBT people in Britain, which will then be used to inform future measures for boosting equality. A consultation on the Gender Recognition Act will be published in the autumn. It will look at removing the need for a medical diagnosis of gender dysphoria before being able to apply for gender recognition. The current need to be assessed and diagnosed by clinicians is sometimes seen as intrusive. Ruth Hunt, chief executive of Stonewall, welcomed the proposals. Were pleased the government recognises there is still more to be done to ensure all lesbian, gay, bi and trans people are accepted without exception, she said. The consultation on reforming the Gender Recognition Act is hugely encouraging. The 2004 act was ground-breaking in giving trans people a way to have their gender legally recognised, but the process is in dire need of reform. We need a simple process which isnt medicalised, intrusive or demeaning. We would urge the government to ensure that all trans communities are consulted and to act quickly on their concerns. Change to the blood donation rules are also welcome. However, while this is an important move, its vital that this is a stepping stone to a system that doesnt automatically exclude most gay and bi men. Greening said: This government is committed to building an inclusive society that works for everyone, no matter what their gender or sexuality and today were taking the next step forward. We will build on the significant progress we have made over the past 50 years, tackling some of the historic prejudices that still persist in our laws and giving LGBT people a real say on the issues affecting them."
"98""People who want to change their gender are suffering from a mental illness and encouraging them to do so is akin to affirming the belief of someone suffering from anorexia that they are fat, a conservative campaign group has claimed. A spokesperson for Grassroots Conservatives, which is independent of the party but primarily draws its membership from its supporters, said activists were concerned about the governments plans to streamline the process of changing gender. In my view, it should not be easy to do something as massive as change your gender and the law is there to protect us, normally from other people, but also sometimes from ourselves, said Mary Douglas. She told BBC Radio 4s Today programme on Monday that, while she was not a doctor, she had read work by some who believed gender dysphoria to be a mental health issue. Until very recently, that was the medical consensus and I dont see that anything has changed. Douglas  who acts as the groups spokesperson on family, religion and public life  added: Its certainly not intended to be insulting but if, for example, you have someone with anorexia who says I am too fat ... its not actually respectful or loving to affirm that person in a belief that is false, that doesnt tie up with reality. She was commenting on the governments proposals, which emerged at the weekend, to speed up and de-medicalise the process of changing gender. Current rules require an applicant to have had a diagnosis of gender dysphoria and to provide evidence that they have been in transition for at least two years. The government proposed the changes as part of a consultation that also suggests making it easier for gay men to give blood. The plans were unveiled by the women and equalities minister, Justine Greening.   Related: Gender identity clinic services under strain as referral rates soar    Douglas said: I think many people have really profound concerns about this. If somebody thinks they have a mismatch between how they think and the way their body is, the question is: Which should be changed? Whats interesting is that many people who have gender dysphoria also have  not all, but many  other mental health conditions, like depression or drug addiction. Theyre deeply troubled. And it has been proven that, when they change their gender, that doesnt solve those issues. So, theres an underlying issue here.  Douglas also suggested that Greening could be pursuing the changes, which were in the most recent Labour manifesto, but not the Conservative one, because she was gay. She added: The issue is one of identity and certainly, from a conservative with a small c point of view, if we have abandoned our Christian roots, then we have lost any sense of who we are. Announcing the proposals, Greening said on Sunday: This government is committed to building an inclusive society that works for everyone, no matter what their gender or sexuality and today were taking the next step forward. We will build on the significant progress we have made over the past 50 years, tackling some of the historic prejudices that still persist in our laws and giving LGBT people a real say on the issues affecting them."
"99""We, the undersigned, are seriously concerned about the dilution of gender rights and equality regarding minority and in this case Muslim girls and women rights. We refer to the case of Al-Hijrah school, a co-ed faith school in Birmingham that has been segregating boys and girls during lessons and all breaks, activities and school trips (Gender-divided school is named, 11 July). The school was inspected by Ofsted, who judged it to be inadequate on a number of grounds including gender segregation. We recognise the existence of single-sex schools but our concerns are with co-educational faith schools that apply gender segregation throughout the school day. It is as abhorrent as segregating people according to their race or sexuality. To engage in such conduct within a secular democracy raises fundamental questions about the type of society we are creating. Why are we allowing such educational institutions to waver from the basic freedoms our ancestors have fought for? We are in danger of creating a two-tier system in which minority women, especially Muslim women and girls, are being systematically treated as second-class citizens. Our progressive parties, institutions and even some on the left and within feminist circles seem to be abandoning the fight for gender equality in favour of religious dogma. In the land from which the suffragettes arose, this steady erosion of gender equality principles would be ironic if it was not so dangerous. We seem to be sleepwalking into the hands of regressive religious forces that want to dissolve women basic human rights under the guise of religious expression. In any education institution, publicly funded or not, an adherence to equality, a principle long established through struggles fought in wider society, should be a foundation stone that is non-negotiable. If we do not act now, the politics of gender segregation will burden the next generation of women and girls. We cannot live in bunkers or allow a silo mentality to take hold in state-funded institutions. We only have to look across to our sisters in the US, South Asia and the Middle East to see the negative impact culturally, socially and politically that ultra-conservatives have on women rights and democracy. If we dont act collectively and fight against these acts of systematic gender discrimination, we will be responsible for colluding with the forces of regression that seek to control and restrict the rights of the next generation of women and girls. Amina Lone Co-director, Social Action and Research Foundation, Pragna Patel Southall Black Sisters, Sara Khan Inspire, Iram Ramzan Journalist and founder of Sedaa, Tehmina Kazi Human rights activist, Amber Lone Writer, Aisha K Gill Professor of criminology, University of Roehampton, Gina Khan Spokesperson for One Law for All, Dr Elham Manea Academic and human rights advocate, Aisha Ali Khan Human rights activist, Zehra Zaidi Founder of Stand Up and civic activist, Lejla Kuric women rights activist, IIa Patel women rights campaigner, Dr Sundari Anitha University of Lincoln, Aliyah Saleem Vice-chair of Faith to Faithless, Yasmin Rehman women human rights activist, Sandhya Sharma women human rights activist, Ayesha Hazarika Commentator and comedian, Gita Sahgal Centre for Secular Space, Nasreen Rehman Human rights activist; vice-chair, National Commission on Forced Marriage, Dr Rumana Hashem women rights campaigner, Maryam Namazie Spokesperson for Council of Ex-Muslims of Britain and One Law for All  We congratulate the government for ensuring  through the Children and Social Work Act 2017  that relationships and sex education (RSE) will soon be taught in all schools in England. This is an important step in boosting the future health and safety of children and young people. We&#xa0;further note that the act mandates the education secretary to publish regulations and statutory guidance regarding schools provisions of these subjects. But this is open-ended and undefined, with the danger that RSE remains at risk of being hijacked by those who wish to overlook topics such as accessing confidential sexual and reproductive healthcare services and contraception, as well as those who wish to limit pupils to what they consider to be religiously acceptable notions of gender and sexual orientation. Schools, including faith schools, should be able to reflect upon a reasonable range of religious and cultural perspectives. But it is essential that the RSE that schools provide is accurate, balanced and promotes an acceptance of diversity. We therefore urge that new statutory guidance on schools teaching of RSE should require them to actively promote the acceptance of LGBT people and provide, for pupils of sufficient maturity, factual information about contraception and abortion. We believe making certain that RSE is inclusive and focuses on ensuring pupils are well informed should be paramount, so that efforts to ensure their long-term wellbeing and to tackle prejudice are not undermined. Rabbi Dr Jonathan Romain Chair of the Accord Coalition for Inclusive Education, Yasmin Alibhai-Brown Chair of British Muslims for Secular Democracy, Rev Canon Steve Chalke (Baptist), Founder and leader, Oasis Community Learning, Rev Canon Jane Fraser (C of E) Sex and relationships education specialist and manager of the sex education charity Bodysense, Jayne Ozanne General Synod member and LGBTI equality campaigner, Very Rev Jeffrey John (C of E) Dean of St Albans, Derek McAuley Chief officer, General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches, Martin Pendergast (Roman Catholic) Chair of the Centre for the Study of Christianity &amp; Sexuality, Rev Professor Michael J Reiss (C of E) Specialist adviser to the House of Commons education committee 2014/15 personal, social and health education inquiry, Rt Rev Alan Wilson Anglican bishop of Buckingham, Rev Richard Adfield (C of E), Ruby Almeida Chair of Quest (pastoral support for LGBT Catholics), Simon Barrow Director of the Christian thinktank Ekklesia, Rev Richard Bentley (C of E), Rev Janet Conway (URC), Rev Roger Cornish (URC), Rev Marie Dove (Methodist), Rev Joe Edwards (C of E), Benjamin Ellis Chair of the Jewish LGBTQI inclusivity group, KeshetUK, Dr Maria Exall (Roman Catholic) Chair of the Cutting Edge Consortium and TUC LGBT+ Committee, Rt Rev Michael Doe Preacher to Grays Inn; former Anglican bishop of Swindon, Rt Rev David Gillett Former Anglican bishop of Bolton, Rev Dr Ruth Gouldbourne Co-minister, Bloomsbury Central Baptist Church, London, Cllr Martin Stears-Handscomb (Baptist) Co-chair of Accepting Evangelicals, Savitri Hensman (C of E) Equalities adviser in the care sector and writer on Christian social ethics and theology, Ruth Hilton Chair of the Jewish sexual health charity JAT, Rabbi Esther Hugenholtz Leeds Synagogue, Fr David Ingledew (C of E) All Saints, Hove, Rabbi Margaret Jacobi Birmingham Synagogue, Rev Robert Jennings (URC) Minister at Glenorchy Church, Exmouth, Rev Richard Jones (CofE) Associate minister, Hereford Diocese, Rabbi Laura Janner-Klausner Senior rabbi to Reform Judaism, Rev Richard Kirker (CofE) LGBTI equality campaigner, Rev Dr Jan van der Lely (CofE) Chair of the Modern Church, Rev Stephen Lingwood (Unitarian) Minister of the Bank Street Unitarian Chapel, Bolton, Jeremy Marks Director of Courage UK, Rev Iain McDonald (URC), Rabbi David Mitchell West London Synagogue, Rev Tim Richards (URC) Mid Somerset Group, Rabbi Danny Rich Senior rabbi and chief executive, Liberal Judaism, Rev Professor Chris Rowland (C of E) Emeritus Dean Irelands professor of exegesis of holy scripture at the University of Oxford, Rabbi Elizabeth Tikvah Sarah Brighton Synagogue, Rabbi Fabian Sborovsky Menorah Synagogue, Manchester, Rt Rev Dr Peter Selby (CofE) Former Anglican bishop of Worcester, Rabbi Sybil Sheridan Newcastle Synagogue, Elaine Sommers (CofE) Co-Chair of Accepting Evangelicals, Rev Tim Stead (C of E) Vicar, Holy Trinity Headington, Oxford, Rev Stephen Terry (C of E) Rector of the parish of Aldrington, Hove, Rev Robert Thompson (C of E), Rev Keith Ward DD FBA (C of E) Regius professor of divinity emeritus, University of Oxford, Rev Clare Wilson (C of E), Rev Simon Wilson (C of E), Rev Dick Wolff (URC) Minister in Oxford  Giles Fraser (I applaud British Islams refusal to bow to the establishment, 7 July) makes an enticing case for religious followers and their leaders avoiding being easy meat for the establishment. Changing their views, being more moderate or accepting the baubles that are offered by our governors. I understand the argument he attempts to make. As a socially liberal atheist, I strongly support the right of people to freely believe in what they want to, as long as it does not harm others. I of course, in a free society, have the right to strongly disagree and oppose those views. Most of the problems caused by religion in the world are by its leaders, its strict adherents, or one-sided interpreters of written texts from more than a thousand years ago. The majority of these people are, of course, men. Wherever women rights are denied, refused, or their development restricted, religion and men are not far behind. Giless own church has been an example over the centuries. Islam and Judaism have been less centralised, but the rabbi or the imam have been central not only to interpretation of scriptures but to the enforcement of cultural norms, particularly with regard to women. I think that all citizens in our democracy have a&#xa0;duty to abide by the law, as agreed by parliament, but also to stand up to the powerful, such as government and the wealthy. They should argue the case for their beliefs and support those without power, such as Catholic women in Ireland or Africa who have been raped and want an abortion, or Muslim women forced by their fathers, imams or husbands to wear a face veil. Freedom to stand up against others and to express your views also has corresponding responsibilities. Most religions insist that the principal duty is to their own community or a sect, rather than to our wider society. It is therefore wise, if perhaps not right, that governments attempt to appease their leaders. They do the same for difficult non-believers as well! Jim LockieHarrow, London   Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"100""Church of England bishops have been accused of kicking the issue of same-sex equality into the long grass by offloading the topic to a series of working groups that will not report until 2020 at the earliest. The archbishops of Canterbury and York, the two most senior figures in the church, have established two main groups and four subgroups to advise on pastoral issues and produce a new teaching document on human sexuality. Reporting to the C of Es synod, meeting in York, Justin Welby said the processes aim to take a reasonable time for profound thought by a large number of people across a wide range of views, and during that time provide pastoral guidance. The intention, he added, was to map, to set out clearly where we agree and where we disagree, to help us understand better the issues and the points of conflict. He said he hoped a document would be available for discussion at the synod in early 2020 though on a process this complicated we cannot be pinned down relating to time. Welby was challenged from the floor of the synod on whether bishops were sufficiently aware of the urgency of this matter. Joyce Hill, a lay member of the synod and former pro-vice-chancellor of the University of Leeds, said: There is a lot of long grass potentially growing. In response, the archbishop of Canterbury said: Many people think it should take a lot longer, many think we should come to a quick decision now. All of us would like a magic wand to wave  [but] theres no magic wand. We believe very firmly that a timescale of two and a half to three years both does justice to the depth and range of questions that need to be addressed  and to the need to begin to draw some conclusions for the church. This clearly will not satisfy everyone. The working groups were established after Februarys synod meeting narrowly threw out a bishops report that upheld traditional teaching on marriage. In response, the archbishops said a radical new Christian inclusion in the the church was needed, founded in scripture, tradition and faith while also based on a proper 21st-century understanding of being human and being sexual. But Alan Wilson, the bishop of Buckingham, accused his bishop colleagues of well-meaning temporising waffle while society moved on. The fact is weve been going round this mulberry bush regularly for almost 30 years. Each new iteration consists of a grand announcement that the bishops will lead the way forward, he said. The only way forward is mutual personal respect that acknowledges difference. Instead, the House of Bishops attempts to synthesise a single grand approach to impose top-down. People arent looking for bishops to teach about this. They want us to shut up for a change, listen to someone other than ourselves and learn. Speaking after Saturdays synod session on next steps in human sexuality, Hill said that while the bishops need to be thorough about developing a clearer understanding on these issues, there is a lot of potential for things to be sidelined, postponed and delayed. Society had moved on in its understanding of sexual relationships, and the state had followed by legalising same-sex marriage, but the church doesnt seem to adequately address these issues in a way that can be understood by the nation. The churchs difficulties in moving forward was damaging, especially in relationship with the younger generation  people in their 20s, 30s and 40s. We have a real problem. Acknowledging the profound disagreements within the C of E and global Anglican communion on sexuality, Hill added: Every now and then, if you cant get consensus, you have to say: Lets provide leadership. If it causes division, thats sad but sometimes necessary. There was a growing anxiety among lay members of the church that bishops were stalling on the issues, she said, and I hear a lot of impatience in the pews. The issue of same-sex relationships and whether the church should allow same-sex marriage has dominated synod proceedings in recent years. Conservative Anglicans have threatened to leave the church if it changes its traditional teachings. Last month, Scottish Anglicans voted overwhelmingly in favour of allowing same-sex couples to marry in church in a historic move that set their church on a potential collision course with the global Anglican communion."
"101""I dont remember being overwhelmed with a feeling of liberation in 67, just that I felt at last a little justice had been done. In some respects at least, I was no longer regarded as a criminal. Colin Livetts memory of 27 July 1967  when the Sexual Offences Act 1967 received royal assent, 50 years ago this week  is indicative of the many responses we received from gay people who lived through the moment often described as the legalisation of homosexuality in the UK. Guardian readers who responded to our callout said the act could never be described as anything other than a partial decriminalisation. Some described it as a time of joy and liberation, but said it was just a small landmark towards equality that would not truly exist until many years later.  1967 was a necessary milestone on the road to equality  Mark S, Surrey I was 12 when I realised I was gay. It was Wednesday 7 June 1967  before the act was passed  and I was sat with my parents, watching a BBC2 documentary preceeding it. It portrayed gay men as victims of a cruel twist of nature, with stories of suicide, physical assault and loneliness, but had no representations of happy gay people or relationships. At last I had a name for the sexual attraction I felt to an older boy at school, but this made me feel dreadfully embarrassed and shamed.  At the end of the programme, my mother said to my father: It must be dreadful to have a homosexual child. I didnt come out to them for another 16 years. When I did, they were supportive, although they urged me to be cautious about sharing my feelings.   Related: 'Pride is at a crossroads': readers on marching for LGBT equality    The main shift in perception I think occurred in 1967 was that homosexual men were seen as victims of a probably incurable mental disability rather than as proselytising sinners or predatory, perverted criminals.  Its important to remember the act only partially decriminalised homosexuality. I had my first physical relationship with another man in 1974, when we were both 19. We had therefore committed criminal offences, in that we were below the age of consent and the places where we made love were not private as defined and required by the act.  At university, members of the Gay Soc, one of the first in the UK, were constantly scrutinised by college authorities  and two gay men under 21 were sent down having been found in bed together. I believe this reinforced my sense of shame, culminating in problems with anxiety, depression and alcohol.  At times, the past 50 years of my life have been a struggle, but as part of my recovery I decided to focus my energies on campaigning vigorously for gay rights. Much has been achieved, especially in the new millennium  in my view, equality was only achieved in 2014 when the Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Act 2013 officially came into force. So although the 1967 act did not provide liberation for gay men, it was a necessary milestone on the road to gay equality.  Gay life previously had been covert and potentially shameful  Dugan, 76  I rejoiced when the act was passed. Gay people like me felt elated at our new-found freedom to be ourselves. Although it had never inhibited my behaviour, the previous law penalised what were victimless crimes and was just plain nasty.      Dugan today.    Gay life previously had been covert and potentially shameful  in London, where I lived, there was wide acceptance of gay people, but of course there was still discrimination against us. It was difficult for a gay couple to rent a flat or get a mortgage, for example (we did, but lesbians were expected to find a guarantor  and for us it still seemed necessary to find a gay-friendly solicitor). I can only remember one person who said he was gay but felt he couldnt have sex because it was illegal  life just carried on  but of course we all knew there was the risk of being found out.  So though it didnt change my day-to-day life, 1967 was a very important step towards equality during a period of liberation and hope.  True equality took longer. The age of consent was still 21, so sex with or between young people was still illegal and was indeed prosecuted avidly. For me the true public turning point wouldnt come until decades later, when Tony Blair appointed Chris Smith and four other openly gay people as cabinet ministers in 1997. The government should aplogise for the terrors imposed on gay people  Colin Livett, 74 Things actually got a great deal worse in the two or three years after the act because of its restrictions  fundamentally that although under extremely limited circumstances it was now legal to have sex with a lover, it was illegal to try to meet anyone, with convictions for such crimes as importuning for an immoral purpose. How dare they make judgment that my love was an immoral purpose?  I dont remember being overwhelmed with a feeling of liberation in 67, just that I felt at last a little justice had been done. In some respects at least, I was no longer regarded as a criminal.     Glad to Be Gay singer Tom Robinson (centre) with Graham Norton and Holly Johnson at the Pride march in London in 1998. Photograph: Piers Allardyce/Rex    But the police had a field day and became the enemy for many: there were incidents of gay bashing and blackmail. Convictions increased  see the lyrics of Tom Robinsons Glad to Be Gay for details. [So sit back and watch as they close all our clubs / Arrest us for meeting and raid all our pubs / Make sure your boyfriends at least 21 / So only your friends and your brothers get done] Many other gay people and their families went on to suffer for decades  the government should do more to apologise for the terrors imposed on them. To simply pardon people is an insult. The 1967 act had deficiencies, then, but the many campaigning groups that these prompted have brought so many advances. We should celebrate the advances, but its been proved that you cannot partially make people equal. They will want more. We still do."
"102""A parent whose baby has been given a health card that does not specify a sex  believed to be a world first  has said the aim is to allow the child to discover their gender on their own. I think were starting to understand that gender identity is not directly attached to genitals, Kori Doty, a non-binary trans person who does not identify as male or female, told the Guardian in an interview.  I dont want to put them in a box where they only get to wear pink and ruffles or they only get to wear blue and trucks. Im just trying to leave that space open, so that when they can say who they are, that they dont have to say your guess was wrong. Canadian authorities have issued baby Searyl Atli a health card that does not specify male or female in what campaigners describe as a victory in the fight to have gender and sex designations omitted from government documents.   Related: A child without a gender challenges our preconceptions about sex | Polly Carmichael    But since giving birth to Searyl at a friends home in November, Doty is still fighting to have the babys sex kept off the birth certificate. The fight is part of a broader, years-long push. Doty is one of eight trans and intersex individuals who have filed a human rights complaint against their home province of British Columbia, pointing to their personal experiences to allege that it is discriminatory to publish gender markers on birth certificates. At the heart of their complaint is the presumption that only two genders exist and that babies must be slotted into one of these at birth, regardless of what gender identity they might develop later in life. Doing so leaves some struggling to contend with incorrect assumptions made about them at birth while others face a logistical nightmare of carrying identification that fails to accurately reflect who they are. In 2015, the human rights tribunal of British Columbia agreed to hear their complaint. I think really this is about recognising a structure, or a system, that is violating everyone, said Doty, 31. The binary gender system causes problems for everyone, including people that find ways to fit and conform in it. It is a disservice to all. Doty would instead like to have gender seen as part of a spectrum  a view that would not only benefit trans and intersex people but also every boy who is cut off from their emotional wellbeing and told to suck it up and not cry and enculturated into toxic masculinity, said Doty. It also serves every girl who is told she shouldnt want to make things or be good at math or be strong. After Searyl was born, the province refused to issue the child a birth certificate, pointing to the requirement that sex be noted on the document. In response Doty filed a legal challenge, citing the protection of gender expression in the provincial human rights code as well as in the Canadian Human Rights Act. Recently the province issued Searyl a health card marked with a U for sex  assumed by Doty to mean undetermined or unassigned  allowing the child access medical care. Despite the card arriving without explanation or comment from the ministry, Doty described it as a victory but noted: Its just not the end of the game.    Related: I know what it's like to be a trans teen at school. Here's how to deal with the bullying | Aimee Challenor    Without a birth certificate, Searyl is listed as a non-citizen in the provinces system. The court case is expected to be heard in late autumn, said barbara findlay, a human rights lawyer who chooses to spell her name without capital letters and is working with Doty on the court challenge. There used to be a reason to put sex on birth certificates. You used to need to know that because only men could vote, only men could own property, only men could sit in the Senate, and so on. Those days are long gone, said findlay. And just as we used to have race on birth certificates, but we dont any more, its time to take sex off birth certificates and treat it, like race, as a private matter.  As Doty pushes forward with the case, the parent has heard from both supporters and detractors. I know that Im being discussed in mens rights activist forums, I know that there are articles written about me and the way that my parenting practices are tantamount to abuse.  But the cost of doing nothing is too high, said Doty, pointing to polls that suggest as many as 40% of transgender people in the US have attempted suicide at some point in their lives. I want to raise my kid in such a way that whatever their gender is, it doesnt have to give them angst.  While the health card was a step forward, the ultimate goal is to have gender markers taken off all government documents, said Doty. Were talking about what is essentially a large-scale systemic change. Not just in the way that offices that issue documents function, but also in the way that our culture understands who we are, to ourselves and to each other, Doty added. That kind of change, it isnt a one-step game.  This article was amended on 7 July 2017. Due to an editing error an earlier version said Baby Searyls gender had been marked as U on their health card. This has been changed to say sex. The article made a number of erroneous references to gender, which have since been changed to say sex or gender markers."
"103""Tens of thousands will head to central London on Saturday to celebrate Pride. This years event is one its organisers hope will be both a celebration of diversity and a public expression of solidarity with the LGBT community. Ahead of the event Peter Tatchell sparked debate about Prides ethos after arguing in the Guardian that it has become too commercialised and bureaucratic, and was in danger of losing its radical and political edge.  One reader responded by highlighting positive changes, recounting how his friend was arrested at a Pride march 20 years ago for wearing his army pin, having been kicked out of the forces; now, the army, navy and RAF are permitted and encouraged to march: led, too, by the Queens musical band of soldiers. But others agreed Pride was at a crossroads. Its sense of purpose, at least for London, is no longer quite as clear as it was, argued one. Is it merely a party? Is there a need for a political angle? Can it feasibly incorporate both aspects to everyones satisfaction? We asked readers who attend Pride events to think about these issues and to tell us why the movement remains important to them, and also how things are changing. Here are some of their stories and views. It is no longer a spontaneous collection of individuals  Christopher, 59, London I have attended every Gay Pride since 1982 and I wouldnt miss it for the world. The event shows London that we are here, we are queer, were proud, and were not going away.    Christopher at Pride London 1991\" width=\"1000\" height=\"652\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Christophers partner and friends at Pride London 1991.    But it is no longer a spontaneous collection of individuals who want to march through the streets showing the world that they are not ashamed of being gay, and stating it in public. The original idea of the march in 1972 was to fight oppression: now we are oppressively controlled and can no longer take part in what was a march but is now a parade without the spontaneous freedom of earlier years. I see this as a regression. At my first Gay Pride in 1982, the party after the march fit into a single large room at the University of London Union building. Over the following years we began to fill parks rather than rooms, and by the 1990s the event had become huge. In recent years I have been really angry that to attend you have to register as part of an approved group  it is no longer possible to take part in the parade as an individual.  I hope in future there will be an organised movement to reverse this by ignoring the current restrictions, which I see as discrimination fuelled by unambiguous homophobia. We have come full circle: its time to take to the streets again in our tens of thousands. I still remember how scary it was but how happy it made me  Alex, 18, Gloucestershire I first attended Pride when I was 14. It was the first time I had held hands with a same sex partner in public and I still remember how scary it was but how happy it made me.  Pride is a time where I can hold my boyfriends hand in public without fear. It seems simple but its so rare  both of us have been heckled and abused in the street, and he has been physically assaulted for wearing rainbow clothes during pride month. So its a space for us to just exist.  There is definitely an increasing commercial presence, with some companies hijacking our movement to develop their psuedo-progressive brand identity and advertise themselves. Its heartless, saddening, and enraging. I agree with Tatchell. Pride is not supposed to be a party for straight people to wear glitter and get drunk. Vulnerable LGBT people are being made homeless, being harassed and discriminated against, being attacked and murdered. We need to fight for those most at risk in our community, such a transgender women of colour, and not give in to corporate white washing of our most basic values and goals. I remember how amazing it felt to be out and proud in such frightening times  Anon, 55, Brighton Pride events such as the one I go to in Brighton have changed hugely since I first started attending in the late 1980s. They used to have a much bigger political and campaigning quality to them  but I still attend because I think it is important to me to feel the strength in numbers of solidarity and diversity of the LGBT community.  I remember the emotions stirred protesting against Section 28 and how amazing it felt to be out and proud in the face of such frightening times. We have different fears now, but it seems there has been far less passion for protest. An indifference has swept over. I hope this is about to change. I dont like how Pride has become so commercial and primitive in its emphasis of club music, drinking and drugs.  In spite of massive progress there is still a long way to go in terms of improving LGBT lives  David Amini, 37, Manchester I first attended Manchester Pride in 1997 or 1998 as a fresh-faced and nave teenager. These days its a major social event for me, a glorious long weekend each summer with my partner and some good friends who come up to visit. It is a fun and celebratory atmosphere in which LGBT people come together to express themselves openly and freely without the fear of negative looks or remarks  allowing you to be proud of who you are as an LGBT person and of the friendship circle and relationships you hold most dear Without a doubt it is a lot better organised now than it was in its 90s heyday, but this has come at the cost of becoming more overtly commercial and expensive to attend. The cost of a wristband to access has increased steadily over the years, as have the prices of drinks. During the parade, which is open to all, many of the floats are sponsored by businesses promoting their employee LGBT networks, but clearly also benefiting from the associated PR and marketing.     Celebrating Pride in Brighton in 2016 Photograph: Tristan Fewings/Getty Images    The main successes of the Pride movement have been increasing the visibility and prominence of LGBT people in society; of making the gay scene a place of cultural interest and a talking point for all. Importantly also, Pride shows those just coming out of the closet that there is a whole world out there and reminds them that they are not alone, as well as showcasing the spectrum of the gay scene. The candlelit vigil for the victims of HIV and Aids is one of the most poignant and emotional events I ever attend and I always try and go each year. It gives the Pride event a sense of purpose and reminds us all that in spite of massive progress there is still a long way to go in terms of improving LGBT+ lives.  This years Pride feels very different  Gem, 34, Hull Hull is City of Culture and with 2017 being 50 years since homosexuality was legalised Pride feels very different this year. Local LGBT venues say they have been pushed out and havent been allowed to be involved in the organisation; they have also lost the right to operate the bars at the event  something theyve done previous years. They feel strongly about this and have taken to social media to let the community know.    Related: Brands co-opting the rainbow make me queasy  but they can bring LGBT lives into the mainstream | Rebecca Nicholson    That said, City of Culture partner companies have been proudly displaying the rainbow flag at their sites and petrol stations, which I think is great. To me this is getting the message out and making it more mainstream, perhaps even creating talking points and opportunities to challenge people who still ask why we need Pride. I have heard other LGBT people say that they feel that they are misappropriating the flag and that these organisations have never bothered before  they feel like theyre being used and think itll be the first and last time these companies will have involvement.  Pride events are a chance to show solidarity and probably the only time I do something within the LGBT community  Ill have fun, see old friends and hopefully continue to strive for equality and acceptance. I think Pride movements still have a big role to play around the world and I hope they continue to make a difference.  Its important to remember Pride events benefit the whole of society  Catherine, 29, London I go to Pride events partly because Im bisexual, but also because I strongly believe that they are a key part in societys acceptance and normalisation of LGBT+ experiences and lives. I enjoy being able to celebrate the incredible achievements of activists and others who fought hard to enable us to have the freedom to parade through the streets  and not to be imprisoned for our sexuality. I had very few safe spaces to be part of the community when I was growing up, but things have definitely changed for the better over the years. Tatchell may complain about the commercialisation or crowd control aspects of the London Pride march, but that barely came across to me last year while I stood with friends in a fun and happy event attended by so many thousands of others. To me, while many profit from these large parades, I think overall the important thing is to remember who also benefits. That is a much, much wider group of people, and arguably includes the whole of our society. "
"104""Philip Henshers article about LGBT Pride (How the straight majority still silences gay people, 22 July) could have been a thoughtful discourse on how queer voices are so often unheard because of the dominance of heteronormativity. Instead, he attacked not just straight people but others whose experience of gender and sexuality is different from the cultural ideal. It is also incorrect  it was not illegal in 1990 for two men to hold hands or kiss in public. Telling the uncomfortable truth about oppression of people with same-sex attraction needs to be done accurately. Most painful is the bitterness with which he talks about the rainbow coalition of sexual identities evicting lesbians and gay men from the spaces they created. The worlds first Pride was organised by a bisexual women, Brenda Howard. It commemorated the Stonewall riots, sparked by a police raid on a bar for lesbians and gay men, and also many trans people, sex workers and others who lived their lives outside sexual or gender normativity. Howard, like many bi and trans people, was a passionate advocate for lesbian and gay rights. And yet, because she had a male partner, Hensher would have us believe that she wasnt part of his community. According to the San Francisco Human Rights Commission, self-identified bisexuals make up the largest single population within the LGBT community and even larger numbers of people exhibit bi behaviours or are attracted to more than one gender (more than 40% of young people, according to a recent YouGov survey). Despite this, bi people continue to be marginalised within LGBT communities, report abuse at Pride events, and tolerate gay celebrities saying we should pick a team. No wonder every published study concludes that bi people suffer worse mental health than lesbians and gay men when their identity and role in LGBT communities is erased. Despite this, I and many other bi people will continue to march at Pride alongside our lesbian, gay and trans friends, challenging discrimination and fighting for equality and acceptance for all.Edward LordDeputy chair, Pride in London community advisory board; board member, BiUK  Philip Hensher makes some good points, so its particularly disappointing that he implies that mixed-sex bisexual couples dont belong in gay clubs. We dont belong in straight clubs, either  so, in the absence of a viable financial model to provide bisexual-only bars across the UK, where does he suggest we go? I would have hoped to find a warm welcome in gay clubs and a sympathetic ally in Hensher, but by purporting to understand our struggles while potentially seeking to exclude us, he enacts precisely the type of silencing that has rendered bisexuals invisible for so long.Ria HopkinsonLondon  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"105""Theresa May has said the Conservative party has been wrong on gay rights in the past, although she said she was proud of the role it had played in recent years.  The prime minister made the statement in an article for the website PinkNews to mark 50 years since the partial decriminalisation of homosexuality in England and Wales. She said: I am proud of the role my party has played in recent years in advocating a Britain which seeks to end discrimination on the grounds of sexuality or gender identity, but I acknowledge where we have been wrong on these issues in the past. May added: There will justifiably be scepticism about the positions taken and votes cast down through the years by the Conservative party, and by me, compared to where we are now. In 1998 May voted against a bill to reduce the age of consent for homosexual acts from 18 to 16, and in 2002 she voted against a measure allowing gay couples to adopt.  In her political career May has been absent for a series of votes affecting LGBT rights, although she backed civil partnerships in 2004. In 2014 she voted to make same-sex marriage available to armed forces personnel outside the UK. Other former prime ministers, including David Cameron and Tony Blair, also contributed to the PinkNews article. Cameron wrote: Were still on that road and, of course, more needs to be done, particularly on the vital task of working internationally to change laws and attitudes. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, wrote that much more needs to be done to tackle homophobia in our society. Homophobic hate crime must be treated as seriously as hate crime based on race and faith, by being made an aggravated offence. Discussing strides made towards equality, Corbyn wrote: I am proud of the role the Labour party played in these advances, by equalising the age of consent, introducing the Equality Act, equalising adoption laws and legislating for civil partnerships for same-sex couples. Labour also repealed the deplorable section 28 in 2003. The Sexual Offences Act received royal assent on 27 July 1967. It stated that a homosexual act in private shall not be an offence provided that the parties consent thereto and have attained the age of 21 years. It has been called the decriminalisation of homosexuality. In September 2016 the government announced an amendment, known as the Turing law because of the pardoning of the second world war code-breaker Alan Turing. It led to tens of thousands of men being cleared of offences that would not be crimes today."
"106""Fifty years after homosexuality was decriminalised in England and Wales, 72 other countries and territories worldwide continue to criminalise same-sex relationships, including 45 in which sexual relationships between women are outlawed. There are eight countries in which homosexuality can result in a death penalty, and dozens more in which homosexual acts can result in a prison sentence, according to an annual report by the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA).   Related: 'True equality took longer': gay people on the Sexual Offences Act    Southern and east Africa, the Middle East and south Asia persist with the most draconian approaches. Western Europe and the western hemisphere are the most tolerant. But Britain was by no means a frontrunner when it moved 50 years ago to partly decriminalise homosexuality. Some 20 other countries had already led the way, including France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Brazil and Argentina, all of whom had legalised it well before 1900.   map   In Iran, Sudan, Saudi Arabia and Yemen, homosexuality is still punishable by death, under sharia law. The same applies in parts of Somalia and northern Nigeria. In two other countries  Syria and Iraq  the death penalty is carried out by non-state actors, including Islamic State. The report notes that, although the potential exists for a death penalty to be handed down under sharia courts in at least five other countries  Pakistan, Afghanistan, the UAE, Qatar and Mauritania  there is no evidence suggesting that it has been implemented for consensual same-sex acts between adults in private. Same-sex relations  which are variously criminalised under laws covering sodomy, buggery and acts against nature among others  could lead to a prison sentence in 71 states in all. However, this number excludes Egypt, where same-sex relations are technically legal but are vigorously pursued and where hundreds of people are reported to be detained on morality grounds. Altogether, more than 120 countries have decriminalised homosexuality. But some still cannot be described as liberal. Russia, for example, has recently introduced laws banning the promotion of homosexuality. Russia was recently rebuked by the European court of human rights for a 2013 law banning the spread of propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations among minors. A co-author of the ILGA report, Aengus Carroll, said it remained the case that there was no country in the world where LGBT people are safe from discrimination, stigmatisation or violence.   Related: Queer politics has been a force for change  celebrate how far we've come | Jeanette Winterson    Legislative change is slow enough in coming, but societal attitudes, particularly those that may evoke taboo, are painstakingly slow, he said.  However, he pointed to some positive developments, in countries including Botswana, Kenya, Zimbabwe and Tunisia, where advocates have recently won court cases affirming the right to form organisations to lobby for rights. There have also been amazing strides on sexual orientation and gender identity issues around the world. A parliamentary vote in Germany will lead to the legalisation of same-sex marriage later this year; marriage equality in Malta will bring to 24 the number of states allowing gay marriage. A similar number of states offer civil partnership recognition. At the time of publication of the ILGA report, there were 26 countries that allowed for joint adoption for same-sex couples and 27 in which same-sex second parent adoption  where a same-sex parent can legally become a step-parent to his or her partners child  was in place. A spokesman for the LGBT charity Stonewall said that, while it was important to remember how far the UK had come on LGBT rights since the 1967 Sexual Offences Act, many challenges remained. Same-sex relations are illegal in 72 countries, and punishable by death in eight. We all have a part to play in ensuring all LGBT people are accepted without exception and all we can hope is that, in 50 more years, we will have lots more progress to look back on, said Matt Horwood.  Trans people still face a number of legal barriers and LGBT people as a whole continue to face discrimination in their daily lives. LGBT people can find themselves excluded, or face verbal and physical abuse, whether at work, at school, in sport, in faith or within local communities."
"107""The Church of England has called on the government to ban conversion therapy and has condemned the practice, which aims to change sexual orientation, as unethical and potentially harmful. At the end of an emotional debate in which two members of the C of E synod described their experiences as spiritual abuse, the churchs governing body overwhelmingly backed a motion saying the practice had no place in the modern world. Conversion therapy is usually described as an attempt to change a persons sexual orientation or gender identity. Some churches in the C of E and other denominations have encouraged LGBT members to take part in prayer sessions and other activities to rid them of their sin.   Related: Church of England bishops delaying same-sex equality move    Proposing the motion, Jayne Ozanne  who underwent conversion therapy resulting in two breakdowns and two spells in hospital  said conversion therapy was abuse from which vulnerable adults need protecting. It was discredited by the government, the NHS, the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Royal College of General Practitioners and many other senior health care bodies, she said. Quoting from a statement issued earlier this year by the UK Council for Psychotherapy and other bodies, she said: Exclusion, stigma and prejudice may precipitate mental health issues for any person subjected to these abuses. Ozanne quoted an online survey she recently conducted in the LGBTI community, in which just under 40% of her 553 respondents said they had undergone some form of conversion therapy. More than two-thirds said they had chosen to do so because they believed their sexual orientation to be sinful. Just under three-quarters were under the age of 20 when they began conversion therapy. Ed Cox, of the C of Es youth council, struggled to maintain composure as he spoke of his personal experience of being told his sexual orientation was a lifestyle choice or phase and needed prayer. This fundamentally says I was made wrong, he told the synod. As a result of what he described as spiritual abuse, he suffered severe depression. John Sentamu, the archbishop of York, said conversion therapy was theologically unsound, so the sooner the practice of [it] is banned, I can sleep at night. Paul Bayes, the bishop of Liverpool, said LGBT orientation was neither a crime nor a sin. We dont need to engage people in healing therapy if they are not sick. Fenella Cannings-Jurd, a student at Durham university, said she found it hard to believe that in 2017 we are seriously debating the pros and cons of conversion therapy. It was by and large seen as a violation of basic human rights, she said. Some synod members expressed concern that the motion would limit the churchs ability to offer pastoral care and prayer for people struggling with issues of sexual desire and orientation. The final vote, after a complicated series of amendments, was 298 to 74, with 26 abstentions. The motion had the backing of all three houses of the synod, the bishops, clergy and laity. Speaking before the debate, Ozanne said she wanted the church to make a clear public statement. As the established church we can encourage other denominations and faiths to consider their positions on this, she said. Conversion therapy was particularly prevalent in minority ethnic Pentecostal denominations, and in some extreme cases young people were sent back to their familys country of origin for corrective rape. In a letter to members of synod, Sonia Soans, the editor of Asylum magazine for democratic psychiatry, recounted the case of Esther, a British lesbian and Anglican, who was taken to her parents native country on the pretext of a holiday a few years ago. Very quickly, Esther learned she was being forced into a marriage with a man she did not know. Her conversion included some religious rituals, with prayers for her conversion being offered by those around her, wrote Soans. When Esther protested, she was locked in her house, but managed to escape. She lives in hiding now, as she fears her family will track her down and perhaps kill her. She suffers from panic attacks and sleeplessness. Ozanne quoted from a letter she had received from a 90-year-old C of E priest, who said: I am a celibate homosexual and have suffered a lifetime of reactive depression resulting from my inability to accept my sexual orientation  I was brought up an evangelical Christian. The trouble started for real when in my early 20s a fundamentalist Christian sought to exorcise my demon as he called [it], but failed to do so. This resulted in a breakdown and hospitalisation where I was administered electric current therapy. After that I had testosterone injections for a year administered by my local GP. There followed two years of Freudian analysis in the hope that my sexual orientation would be redirected. I was then given lithium  followed by no end of personal counselling, therapy and prayer, all of which totally failed to make one jot of difference to my sexual inclinations  On two occasions, I have contemplated suicide."
"108""Top story: Moscow ties to be examined Good morning to you, Graham Russell here with a pick of the latest goings-on. Donald Trump Jr and the US presidents one-time campaign chairman Paul Manafort are set to publicly testify next week as the US Senates investigation into ties between Russia and Trump gathers pace. It comes less than two weeks after it emerged they met a Kremlin-linked lawyer in 2016 who offered Trump Jr negative information about Hillary Clinton.  Another figure at that meeting, Trumps son-in-law Jared Kushner, is expected to testify next week, but behind closed doors. Meanwhile, the investigation by special counsel Robert Mueller into Donald Trumps Russia ties is expected to subpoena or request data from Deutsche Bank, the presidents personal banker, its executives believe. A person close to the matter who spoke to the Guardian said Muellers team and the bank have already established informal contact.  The Senate will be without the services of John McCain, who has been diagnosed with brain cancer. A brain tumor known as a glioblastoma was removed from McCain along with a blood clot during surgery on Friday. Messages of support came from across the divide, with Barack Obama praising him as an American hero and that cancer doesnt know what its up against. * * * Thatchers justice  Margaret Thatcher intervened to ensure the Moors murderers, Myra Hindley and Ian Brady, were never released from prison, cabinet papers have revealed. She told her home secretary, Leon Brittan: Their crime was the most hideous and cruel in modern times and overruled his proposed minimum sentences of 30 years for Hindley and 40 years for Brady.  Other papers reveal how John Major broke the news to Thatcher that he was scrapping the infamous poll tax. In his five-page Dear Margaret letter he said I am convinced that it would never be accepted as equitable and that it would never be properly collectable either. His note avoids any mention of the officially forbidden poll tax phrase. * * * Grenfell rancour  The newly elected leader of Kensington and Chelsea council faced immediate calls from Grenfell tower residents to resign during a chaotic and angry meeting on Wednesday evening. Elizabeth Campbell promised cultural change and improvements to how social housing was managed but faced boos and cries of never, shame and liar. At an earlier meeting, disaster inquiry head Sir Martin Moore-Bick was repeatedly urged to ensure it considers not just the technical causes of the fire but the impact of gentrification policies in the borough. * * * BBC pay  Despite making virtually every front page in the land today, what chance is there that publication of the BBCs vast gender pay gap will lead to lasting change? Sam Smethers, chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said director-general Tony Hall will have to do some pretty radical things if he wants to close the gap by 2020.  Miriam OReilly, who won an ageism case against the BBC in 2011, said there was now an opportunity to address the issue and banish the idea that somehow men were more valuable because they brought more gravitas and credibility to news. But will it bring change? I think it might change what they pay people, but in terms of the sexism that goes on, no, I dont think it will. Im always ever hopeful. To broaden the fight beyond beating up only Auntie, heres a handy guide to pushing for pay equality.  * * * Thom Yorke presses on  Radiohead have performed before a sellout crowd in Tel Aviv, despite protests from activists and dozens of figures in the art world that they should boycott Israel. According to reports, Radiohead played a 27-song set and two encores, including hits such as No Surprises, Creep and Karma Police. Richard Ferrer, editor of the London-based Jewish News newspaper, quoted Thom Yorke telling the crowd: A lot was said about this, but in the end we played some music. * * * Locked away  Thousands of mental health patients are being held in secure wards for years in what one doctor described as a Victorian approach to their care. The findings by the Care Quality Commission has prompted fears the patients are becoming institutionalised rather than rehabilitated. * * *     The Command of the Ocean visitor centre in Chatham. Photograph: Helene Binet    Stirling effort: A pier, a campus and some listed sheds are all in the running to win the RIBA Stirling prize for the UKs best new building. The City of Glasgow Colleges city campus is the standout champion if the criteria involve recognising civic spirit, education and sheer complexity, writes Oliver Wainright. My uneducated eye was drawn to the shed-turned-visiter centre at Chatham Historic Dockyard (like a keenly sharpened pencil) and the Hastings pier, though images of its woodwork induced a slight sense of seasickness. * * * MP culpa  An MP in New Zealand has taken the extraordinary step of revealing that she lied in order to avoid losing welfare payments as a young single mother who wanted to go to law school. Here she tells in her own words why she did it, and reasons go beyond national borders. * * * Lunchtime read: a Pirelli calendar of quality and colour      If you were told the Pirelli calendar had an Alice in Wonderland theme, it might once have conjured up some very different images. But now, we have the likes of Naomi Campbell, Sean Diddy Combs and RuPaul posing for images styled by Edward Enninful, the newly appointed editor of British Vogue and the first person of colour to have held the post. This is not the first time Pirelli has featured an all-black lineup  in 1987, a 16-year-old Campbell posed topless for an edition that featured only black models. This time, however, the tone is wildly different, writes Ellie Violet Bramley. It feels precision-engineered to strike a chord in an era in which fashion finally seems to be addressing its diversity problem. Sport With the Open upon us once again, Andy Bull finds Royal Birkdale in readiness for a pleasingly unpredictable title fight among the key contenders. Sean Ingle, on the other hand,wonders whether golf can hold its ground as a major sport in the UK, where participation figures and TV viewership are down. One of the most interesting players in the field is 23-year-old Californian Bryson DeChambeau, whose physics major makes him either far less or far more susceptible to the games fickle nature, depending on your worldview. The world No2 Hideki Matsuyama, meanwhile, might be the sports most unsung star. Chris Froome has brushed aside attacks from Romain Bardet and Daniel Martin to retain the yellow jersey in Le Tour, while F1 bosses have confirmed the contentious halo device will be compulsory for drivers in 2018. An investigation into the possibility that a match at Wimbledon was subject to match-fixing is not connected to any of the retirements that took place during the tournament, reports Jacob Steinberg. Less serious and far more amusing: NBA players arent happy with their skill ratings in the new NBA 2k18 video game. Surfer Mick Fanning is just pleased to be standing on both feet after being pulled from the water after another shark scare. Business Stock markets have surged to a near 10-year high after unexpectedly strong recent profits from US companies sent the Dow Jones, S&amp;P500 and Nasdaq to record highs on Wall Street. The FTSE100 is set to open up 0.33% this morning but the big interest will be in what the European Central Bank say about monetary policy later in the day. The pound was flat overnight at $1.30 and 1.131. The papers Its all BBC on the front pages.      The Mail screams Mutiny and says furious employees at the politically correct BBC are rising up against lavish pay deals, especially for the male broadcasters.The Mirror has Bloated Blokes Club and says the top seven employees are all white men and only two in the top 14 are women. The Star goes with Mind the pay gap.  The Sun highlights what it is says was the awkward moment on BBC Breakfast news when two broadcasters discussed the BBC pay news. The male presenter, Dan Waker, is paid between 200,000 and 249,000 and his co-host Louise Minchin is paid under 150,000. (Walker had this reaction to that front page.) The Times meanwhile headlines with BBC faces revolt over pay divide and says female stars will force salary rises. The Guardian also highlights the backlash at the BBC and says the corporation has been attacked for clear discrimination. The Telegraph has the line that the BBCs male stars may now face a pay cut. It says it has learned the government wants the highest paid to take a 10% reduction. The FT splashes on the story as well, saying Theresa May has criticised the BBC and called for men and women to be paid equally. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Morning Briefing by email every weekday at 7am, sign up here."
"109""Your article (Secret transgender Victorian surgeon feted by Historic England, 25 July) incorrectly stated that the first Caesarean section was not performed in Britain until 1833. In fact, the first recorded attempt at C-section took place in 1737, performed by Edinburgh surgeon Mr Smith. The patient, Mrs Paterson, died along with her baby. The first successful C-section in the British Isles was performed in either 1738 or 1739 by an Irish midwife called Mary Donally. The patient, Alice ONeal, survived. Despite this remarkable success, Donally was dismissed by male writers of the 18th and 19th centuries as an ignorant women who simply got lucky. Female medical practitioners have all too often been overlooked by both their contemporaries and later historians, and sadly your article about Dr James Barry continues in this unfortunate tradition. Using the term transgender misrepresents the reasons why Barry chose to disguise herself as a man: it&#xa0;was not because she suffered from gender dysphoria in the modern sense, but because women were barred from entering the medical profession. The first British women permitted to qualify as a doctor, Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, was born almost 50 years after Barry and faced a great deal of opposition from her male colleagues. It would have been impossible for Barry to practise as a doctor if she had not disguised herself as a man. While it is wonderful to see Barry honoured by Historic England, I am sorry to see the history of female doctors misrepresented. The misogyny of the medical profession, as well as the bravery of those women who fought for access to medical training, should not be forgotten. Louise PerryOxford   Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"110"" When Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit was televised on BBC2 in 1990, it was the second episode that caused trouble, because two girls, certainly under 18, were kissing each other and about to have sex. Sex between women has never been illegal in the UK. When Henry VIIIs Buggery Act  they called a spade a shovel back then  was replaced by the 1861 Offences Against the Person Act, sex between women was ignored.   Related: Homosexuality was decriminalised 50 years ago: our writers consider the effect | Paul Burston, Stephen K Amos, Terry Stewart, Julie Bindel, Joe Stone    That is because women themselves were ignored. Until the Married women Property Act of 1870, a womens identity on marriage was absorbed by her husband; she could own nothing in her own right, including her own body. And there was, and still is, in the tabloid redoubts of the male mind, the notion that only sex with a penis is sex. At the heart  and not lower down the body parts  of societys torture and torturing over gay sex is upset to the patriarchal order. Old-fashioned thinking assumed that in a gay relationship one was the male and the other the female. So effective was the social norm that many queer couples, as well as those seeking casual sex, believed in this brainwash, adding layers of guilt and confusion to an already fraught situation. When I used to go to clubs in the 1980s, I sometimes went out in ripped jeans and a leather jacket, and sometimes in a skirt with plenty of available bra. One night, an older butch who looked like shed time-travelled from The Well of Loneliness came up to me and said: Are you the bread or the jam? Its taken me years to work out that I am the sandwich. Antagonism towards sexual difference is antagonism towards the challenge, implicit and explicit, against a tidy heterosexism, where straight men arrange the world to suit themselves. Feminism has made common cause with queer identity to address this privilege and assumption at every level  of course this is fraught because gay men are still men, and the trans community is not without issues here  but our internal questioning is subject to the task of changing the way the world is. Queer politics, just like feminism, is a real force to change the way the world is. Part of the change is to move away from rigid roles  feminism has campaigned on this for decades  including how we bring up boys and girls to be sexual without sexism. Sexuality really matters. Human beings do not thrive when we are cut off from desire, or from sexual expression that feels real to us. Discovering yourself in the bedroom is not isolated geography; it affects your whole life.   Related: Gay relationships are still criminalised in 72 countries, report finds    In 1988 the Thatcher regime passed into law clause 28 of the Local Government Act, making it an offence to promote homosexuality in schools. Nobody really knew what this meant, with its malign claims of pretend family relationships; all teachers knew was that they couldnt be positive about any sexual identity other than straight. For me, also 28 at the time, it felt like legalised hatred.  Gay sex wasnt a crime, though between 1967, when supposedly it stopped being a crime, and 2003, when the age of consent was equalised, more than 30,000 men were convicted of gross indecency  something that couldnt have happened had their partners been female.   The problem with decriminalisation in 1967 was that it was progress founded on disgust and pity. Read any of the parliamentary reports or press reporting and there is no word about equality of sexual orientation, or any self-questioning about the normalcy of heterosexuality or the constructs of patriarchy. The Great Leap Forward in terms of our thinking about sexuality and society only makes its way into law from 2000 onwards, when the Blair government lifted the ban on homosexuals serving in the armed forces. Then came equal age of consent, repeal of section 28, civil partnerships in 2004, employment equality, the 2006 Adoption and Children Act, allowing same sex couples to apply for joint adoption, and of course the contentious equal marriage bill in 2014 (soon Ill be able to marry my dog/fridge  the end is nigh  this explains climate change, etc).  Pushing ahead now are transgender reforms, and a project to make sex and relationship education compulsory in schools by 2019. This will include positive same-sex and transgender education. This is all great news, and we should be proud that the UK is one of the best countries in the world to live in, if you identity as LGBTQIA. An elderly friend of mine who has always supported equal rights said to me: Darling, you know I am on your side, but how many more letters of the alphabet do you think you might need? She and I are both proud that the Queen (the one with a capital Q) personally congratulated the Lesbian and Gay Switchboard in 2014 on their 40 years of service.   Related: 'Back home we cant kiss': the gay badminton star forced to flee Uganda    But as Ruth Hunt, the chief executive of the campaign group Stonewall, points out, the UK needs to be more outspoken with our trading partners and aid partners. Homosexuality is still illegal in 72 countries and carries the death penalty in 8 of them.  Here at home, bullying in schools is either being ignored or quietly condoned, with half of LGB pupils admitting to being bullied or taunted. For kids who identify as trans, the figure is 64%. Those horrible stereotypes of gay people as mentally unstable never took into account what it is like to be afraid of yourself  your own desires, your own sexuality  as well as being afraid of those who feel a need to hurt you in order to protect their own fragile identities. Self-questioning is part of mental health  and its good for you. Self-hatred is good for nothing. Its a pity the church cant understand that. Educating religious bigotry is part of the next step. It interests me that so much effort is put into discouraging love, while every day we are encouraged to hate in new and ingenious ways.  But still, I am celebrating how far weve come. When I was growing up in Accrington, two women ran a newsagent where I always got a free bit of chocolate. People thought they were odd  and its true one of them always wore a full-face balaclava, but I think she was just shy. Mrs Winterson stopped me going there because she said they dealt in unnatural passions. I thought she meant they put chemicals in their sweets.  Now, 50 years later, there are two Manchester women in a Cotswolds village near my home, happily out and proud and running their own teashop and store. They are part of the community  both fitting in, and glad to be a bit different  and a great role model for kids and visitors, indeed anyone who just wants us all to live together, and put more love in the world."
"111""Edward Lord states that I was wrong to say that gay men and lesbians could be arrested for kissing in public in 1990 (Letters, 27 July). It is sad to see somebody connected with Pride attempting to diminish the very real persecution that my community faced. In fact, as Peter Tatchell has written, gay men and lesbians continued to be prosecuted, right up until the early 1990s, under public order and breach of the peace laws, for public displays of affection, such as kissing and cuddling. Such prosecutions ended only when the LGBT direct action group, OutRage!, highlighted and protested against them.Philip HensherGeneva, Switzerland  I note that the day after Patricia Greene revealed that she was paid only 16,000 a year for her role in The Archers, her character, Jill Archer, was arrested for assault and given a caution. Clearly the BBC is not giving in easily.Keith FlettLondon  I shall miss William Fotheringhams erudite, interesting and entertaining reports on the Tour de France (Time to bid au revoir after 26 years at the greatest race, 25 July). He is authoritative, lucid, gently instructive and impartial. I hope he does keep writing about the Tour for the Guardian, even if&#xa0;not on a blow-by-blow basis.Kirsty Devaney Dundee  Re Catherine Morlands beginning to long for balls in Northanger Abbey (Letters, 27 July), Id&#xa0;always assumed that here was an early coded plea for gender reassignment. Great Expectations meeting He Knew He Was Right.Chris TaylorChurch Stretton, Shropshire  Looking at an atlas, despite its westerly situation, Cornwall has as much if not more coastline facing true east as it does true west (Letters, 27 July).Neville GoodmanBristol   Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"112""The sad case of Bijan Ebrahimi (Racism killed our brother. We will not be fobbed off, 6 July) illustrates two unpalatable facts about my city. First, that there is a definite hardcore of racism within the institutions of Bristol. Both the police and council officials treated him as a nuisance and preferred to believe the accounts of his thuggish neighbours. Second, that Bristol is not the so-cool vibrant place portrayed by the media (largely fuelled by students and ex-students living in and around Clifton). In fact, as the mayor has acknowledged in the past, it is a deeply divided city with areas of super-rich, others of multi-ethnic communities, and a huge swathe of deprived white working-class ex-council estates. It was to one of these that poor Mr Ebrahimi was sent to live. Why? As long as Bristol refuses to look at itself honestly, these things could happen again.Jane GhoshBristol  The torment suffered by Bijan Ebrahimi leaves a terrible wound on our body politic. A disabled lone refugee with a strong sense of dignity and trust in the authorities was manifestly let down by the very services that should have protected him. Although the IPCC pulled their punches, it would seem, from the catalogue of abuse this poor man suffered at the hands of his tormentors, and the unwillingness of the statutory services to believe him, even when faced with obvious evidence of a crime, that racism is clearly an issue here. But it would be too easy to lay the blame squarely at the feet of the authorities. In the absence of agencies with a clear brief to address the real needs of the victims, agencies that have a broad knowledge of the nature of race and disability hate crime, there are no advocates ready in the community to hold power to account. Since the disbandment of the Commission for Racial Equality, local race equality organisations have taken on a broader equalities remit and addressed the issue of all forms of hate from the standpoint of victims. This gives the victim a champion who will take up the case from their perspective and achieve a modicum of justice. That is exactly the brief of our small organisation. However, survival in a competitive funding environment makes our ability to offer the necessary specialised services to victims, and training to the statutory authorities, a constant struggle. Surely one of the outcomes of our concern at the abuse inflicted on Bijan Ebrahimi must be a recognition that we need to value the work of equality organisations by funding them effectively to address the needs of victims.Diana NeslenOn behalf of the trustees of Redbridge Equalities and Community Council  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"113""Canadians are able to identify as gender neutral on their passports from Thursday under changes that have been enthusiastically welcomed by rights campaigners. Canada becomes the first country in the Americas to allow its citizens to use an X category, joining those in Australia, Denmark, Germany, Malta, New Zealand and Pakistan. India, Ireland and Nepal are among the countries that provide various third-options. All Canadians should feel safe to be themselves, live according to their gender identity and express their gender as they choose, immigration minister Ahmed Hussen said in a statement announcing the changes last week.  By introducing an X gender designation in our government-issued documents, we are taking an important step towards advancing equality for all Canadians regardless of gender identity or expression. Advocacy groups in Canada welcomed the change. Canada is taking an important and positive first step by acknowledging the challenges faced by non-binary, intersex and trans individuals, said Helen Kennedy, executive director of Egale, a Canadian organisation that promotes LGBT human rights. Many people will benefit from having the option of choosing X as their gender when they go to file for their passport. However, it is not the ultimate solution and the addition of a gender-neutral option, as Canada is implementing it, does not address many of the underlying issues being faced by these folks. Kennedy stressed that the introduction of the X designation was no panacea for the ID-related barriers non-binary, trans and intersex people face when travelling by air. She also questioned the need for gender markers on passports in the first place. In order to successfully increase the safety of non-binary, intersex and trans folks, Canada needs to do more work to lobby internationally to remove gender markers on passports, as well as break down existing barriers that are preventing access to gender autonomy in our country, she said. For the time being at least, sex fields are mandatory on all travel documents under International Civil Aviation Organization rules. There are fears that those who identity as X may encounter issues when trying to enter other countries. Im really worried that in countries like Uganda and Jamaica, where being LGBT is illegal and theres laws on the books that prosecute people for identifying as trans, that this could leave people open to arbitrary detention, it could leave them open to scrutiny at airports, degrading treatment, Adrienne Smith, a Toronto immigration lawyer who specialises in transgender legal issues, told Global News. Groups in the UK have long called for the introduction of a similar policy. Rebecca Stinson, head of trans inclusion at Stonewall, which campaigns for LGBT equality in the UK, said: Its great to see Canada introduce a gender-neutral option on passports and we would like this approach to be adopted by the UK. She described how trans and non-binary people faced unnecessary obstacles and questions because of the way gender is recorded on official documents, such as passports. This leaves many trans people feeling afraid to travel for fear of intrusive questioning, she continued. We need this to change. We want everyone to be recognised for who they are and for national and local government documents and procedures to accurately reflect gender identity."
"114""A Google software engineers polemic against diversity efforts has left female staff shaking in anger and forced the tech giant to defend its patchy record on racial and gender equality. The 10-page manifesto, which Google executives acknowledge was written by a company software engineer, initially circulated internally but was leaked to the public. The authors identity remains unknown. The manifesto argues that the lack of women in tech and leadership is the result, at least in part, of innate differences between in men and women. Im simply stating that the distribution of preferences and abilities of men and women differ in part due to biological causes and that these differences may explain why we dont see equal representation of women in tech and leadership, the author writes. After a number of female staff described their disgust at the document on social media, Google sent out a company-wide memo saying it did not represent the companys views.  The documents author claims that the companys problem is left bias, but the row will raise questions about attitudes to women among some members of staff and force Google back into uncomfortable discussions of its record on gender equality, which progressive critics say is poor.  The US Department of Labor found in April that there were systemic issues with equal pay across the company, and described discrimination there as quite extreme.   Related: Men are from Mars, women are from Venus? New brain study says not    Googles perceived political leanings also came under fire, with the author arguing that those with conservative views currently have to stay in the closet to dodge open hostility.  When it comes to diversity and inclusion, Googles left bias has created a politically correct monoculture that maintains its hold by shaming dissenters into silence, the author writes. Conservatives tend to be higher in conscientiousness, which is required for much of the drudgery and maintenance work characteristic of a mature company. The document fuelled alarm and outrage on social media and sent Google executives scrambling to disavow its message. Hours after it became public, Googles new vice-president of diversity, integrity and governance, Danielle Brown, sent an email to company employees saying that its incorrect assumptions about gender were not a viewpoint that I or this company endorses, promotes or encourages. On Twitter, women in the tech industry called for Google to take action. Brianna Wu, a US-based software engineer, asked who was going to be fired over the manifesto, while Jaana Dogan, a programmer at Google, tweeted:    If HR does nothing in this case, I will consider leaving this company for real for the first time in five years.&mdash; Jaana B. Dogan  (@rakyll) August 4, 2017    Others were less surprised to hear what they called a pervasive attitude in an industry long dominated by men. The manifesto is the Silicon Valley mindset in many ways, said Vivek Wadhwa, a distinguished fellow at Carnegie Mellon University college of engineering and a frequent critic of the tech sectors lack of diversity. You could take this to a lot of people and you would hear: Yup, we agree with this. People used to say things like this fearlessly. Wadhwa said the document was an example of the resistance companies such as Google encounter as they attempt to make their firms more equitable.  The companys own record has come in for frequent criticism. Google was one of the first tech giants to disclose demographic information about its workforce in public. The first time the company released the data, though, it revealed Google to be more white and male than the likes of LinkedIn and Yahoo. The company released figures in June showing that the proportion of female and black employees across the company as a whole had not changed from 2015 to 2016. There was a modest increase in the proportion of women in tech and leadership roles and the number of Latino employees, but only 20% of Googles tech roles were filled by women, below the national average of 26%.Asian employees made up 35% of the companys workforce, but they were underrepresented in leadership roles. The manifesto claims that men have a higher drive for status, that women might not like coding because they have more interest than men in people and aesthetics, and that the low number of women in high stress jobs is down to them having more neuroticism. We need to stop assuming that gender gaps imply sexism, the author writes. The document also claims that the gender wage gap is a myth, but Google is locked in an ongoing battle with US labour regulators claiming to have evidence that the company systematically undercompensates women. The governments analysis at this point indicates that discrimination against women in Google is quite extreme, even in this industry, a US Department of Labor lawyer said in April, adding that the agency had compelling evidence of very significant discrimination against women in the most common positions at Google headquarters. Google disputes the agencys claims, saying it has eliminated its wage gap.   In her letter to Google employees, Brown also took issue with the notion Google stifled certain political opinions. Ive never worked at a company that has so many platforms for employees to express themselves, she wrote. Employees of different political views should feel free to voice their opinions, she said. But that discourse needs to work alongside the principles of equal employment. The vice-president of engineering at Google, Ari Balogh, also weighed in on the latest furore with an internal memo criticising the manifesto. One of the aspects of the post that troubled me deeply was the bias inherent in suggesting that most women, or men, feel or act a certain way. That is stereotyping, and it is harmful, he wrote. Building an open, inclusive environment is core to who we are, and the right thing to do. Nuff said."
"115""Black capitalism is coming and I can understand why. Monday was Black women Equal Pay Day in the US.&#xa0;The most shocking figure that&#xa0;I plucked out of the mess of hashtags and outraged memes was that the average American man could go on holiday for seven months and still earn the same as the average African American women who works all year. Grim. Despite being one of the highest-paid athletes in the world, Serena Williams wrote an essay for Fortune magazine illustrating her thoughts on the matter. Today isnt about me. Its about the other 24 million black women in America, she wrote. If I never picked up a tennis racket, I would be one of them; that is never lost on me. There was a muted response to&#xa0;the equal pay day from black women in the UK, as seen by the reaction to the BBCs recent revelations on pay: little attention was paid to the fact that there were just 11 black or minority ethnic people on the list of 96 stars earning more than 150,000. There needs to be more dialogue surrounding the fact that BME Brits are struggling to close the ethnic and gender pay gap.     Serena Williams: supports equal pay for black women. Photograph: Isabel Infantes/PA    In the UK, what the TUC called the massive pay gap for black people widens even as we achieve more qualifications. According to the Fawcett Society, Pakistani and&#xa0;Bangladeshi women see the biggest overall gender pay gap, at 26%, to white British men, while black African women experience the largest full-time gender pay gap, at 19.6%. But while black African women have seen virtually no progress since the 1990s, black Caribbean and Indian women experience a smaller pay gap than white British women, despite higher unemployment rates. Our situation is very different from that in the US, but the root causes are still the same: deep inequalities, embedded by our historical colonisation, and everyday racism combine to create a toxic environment for many black women to progress economically. However, while I understand why black capitalism is such a potent idea, a more radical solution would&#xa0;be to address the social disenfranchisement we face in a&#xa0;different way. Activist Fred Hampton said it best in his speech Power Anywhere Where Theres People, read shortly before he was murdered in 1969: We say you dont fight racism with racism. Were gonna fight racism with solidarity. We say you&#xa0;dont fight capitalism with no&#xa0;black capitalism; you fight capitalism with socialism  anybody who comes into the community to make profit off the people by exploiting them can be&#xa0;defined as a capitalist. Rather than bringing up our wages to match the white mans, especially in a country such as the UK, where the gaps between the richest and poorest are so stark, we need to be looking for a more equal type of equality."
"116""Irans president is under pressure to appoint female ministers as he mulls a cabinet reshuffle before his swearing-in ceremony on Sunday.  Hassan Rouhanis all-male list of ministers during his first term in office dismayed his base even though the moderate cleric appointed a number of women as vice-president, a comparatively less senior position in Irans political hierarchy.  As jockeying intensifies before the unveiling of his new cabinet, concerns have grown that Rouhani may give in to pressure from hardliners and not include women as ministers. Expectation is particularly high because he ran on a reformist agenda. Under the Iranian constitution, the Majlis (parliament), would have to approve his appointees.  Tehran is preparing for a big inauguration ceremony after Rouhanis landslide victory in May. Officials have declared Sunday a bank holiday as eight presidents and senior diplomatic delegations gather in the Iranian capital to mark the beginning of his second term in office. In a sign of thawing relations, the UK is for the first time sending a minister of state, Alistair Burt, who is in charge of the Middle East and North Africa at the Foreign Office.  Despite shortcomings, one existing Rouhani appointee  his vice-president for women and family affairs, Shahindokht Molaverdi  has won the support of some of the countrys most respected women rights campaigners. Her hands have largely been tied in the past four years as she came under huge pressure from hardliners, who threatened her with prosecution.  Molaverdi said in April that as many as three women would be appointed as ministers but she has sounded pessimistic more recently and it is not clear if she would keep her job.  Mohammad Bagher Nobakht, the Rouhani administrations spokesman, said on Tuesday, that the number of women in the cabinet would not go down, the semi-official Isna news agency reported, but he sent mixed signals over ministerial appointments, suggesting there may not be any women as ministers at all.  If there would be no women ministers in the cabinet, that does not mean were not using the potential of women [in the government], he said. Women will still play a significant role. Its an injustice to women to think that they should only be used to fill ministerial roles. The taboo of appointing female ministers after the 1979 Islamic revolution has in fact already been broken. In 2009, former hardline president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad nominated three women as ministers amid opposition from conservative MPs and some senior clerics. One of his appointees, Marzieh Vahid-Dastjerdi, was approved and she became the countrys first post-revolutionary female minister, serving as minister of health and medical education.  Ghoncheh Ghavami, a leading women rights activist based in Tehran, said it is much more important to have gender-sensitive and feminist policies than just merely relying on descriptive representation but nevertheless having female ministers is still important because Irans political system is too male-oriented.   s vice -president for women and family affairs\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Shahindokht Molaverdi, Irans vice-president for women and family affairs. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images    She said: This structure has eliminated women on the excuse of meritocracy and experience but it looks like that main criteria for them is being male. Thats why appointing female ministers is symbolically important and would send a powerful signal in a country where politics still originates from men.  Ghavami said Dastjerdis appointment meant Rouhani had run out of excuses, especially now he was facing a friendlier parliament. She said even a conservative figure such as Dastjerdi performed better than her male colleagues and was removed before too long after a spat with Ahmadinejad.  Conservatives, however, still have traditional views about women, their priority is for women to stay at home and take care of their kids. Even their female parliamentarians held such a world view and were pursuing policies that were discriminatory towards women, she said.  women rights campaigner Fatemeh Sadeghi is among six speakers invited to a discussion panel in Tehran this week called Breaking the Glass Ceiling, in reference to Iranian women in senior managerial roles. She believes symbolic appointment of women as ministers will not resolve challenges faced by women in Iran.  The presence of one or two women in the cabinet wont much advance women rights and the experience of Mrs Mowlaverdi shows that until we pursue gender [equality] policies, we wont see a massive change or transformation for women, she said. "
"117""The co-leader of the New Zealand Green party Metiria Turei has resigned citing unbearable pressure after she revealed that she had lied to claim more benefits as a single mother more than twenty years ago.  Last month Turei admitted to the New Zealand public that she had lied to a government social welfare agency as a 23-year-old single mother in order to survive.   Related: I told a lie to claim benefits. Now I am an MP and I want to talk about why | Metiria Turei    She told Work and Income that she was living alone with her daughter, when in fact she had taken in flatmates to subsidise the cost of her rent.  The revelation was met with shock across the political spectrum, and in the weeks since Turei has faced intense personal and political pressure to resign from parliament, with her critics calling her a criminal and saying she is unfit for public office.  In emotional scenes outside parliament Turei resigned, saying her continued co-leadership of New Zealands third largest political party was an impediment to the Greens gaining votes in New Zealands upcoming election, which is less than two months away.  Resigning as co-leader is my decision, said Turei.  The party did not ask me to resign and as recently as last night the executive gave me a vote of confidence. Turei said the intense public and personal attacks had become unbearable for her family, and the continued scrutiny was distracting attention away from election issues, namely the environment, poverty, and climate change.  In a comment piece for the Guardian last month Turei wrote that she committed benefit fraud over three years in the early 1990s because it was her only way to get by as a solo-parent in New Zealand with no formal educational qualifications. I did not have enough money to pay the rent and put food on the table. And so, like many  but not all  people faced with that choice, I lied to survive, Turei wrote.  I am in a privileged, fortunate position now; I have a voice and I have a platform. Thousands of other New Zealanders who are on a benefit dont have that. In fact, theyre routinely silenced, marginalised and persecuted for the mere fact that they are poor. This week new Labour party leader Jacinda Ardern said Turei would not be offered a role as a minister if Labour formed a new government in the next election. On social media the hashtag #Iammetiria has been trending for weeks, with other single mothers or beneficiaries sharing their stories of the desperate means theyve taken to survive on the New Zealand welfare scheme.  However animosity and criticism of Tureis past actions has at times become vitriolic. Two Green MPs threatened to resign unless Turei left the party. Co-leader James Shaw rejected their pressure and moved to suspend them from the party.  Shaw has resolutely stood by Turei throughout the ordeal, and has frequently praised her devotion to advocating on behalf of New Zealands poorest and most marginalised citizens.  Metiria has been a servant for the party, the environment and for our people for many years, Shaw said in a statement.  Her dedication and commitment have been unparalleled. As I have said, she chose to tell her story in order to open a conversation  and she has done that, said Mr Shaw. Turei has been an MP for 15 years and will no longer be on the Green party list but will campaign for the party vote only in Te Tai Tonga leading up to the national election on 23 September.  Since her revelation three weeks ago, Turei has consistently said she does not regret her decision to front-up as it has drawn attention to the desperate circumstances of New Zealands most vulnerable people.  I also think that as a country we are ready to have a conversation about what life is really like for people on benefits and for the 200,000 Kiwi children growing up in poverty, Turei wrote in her opinion piece for the Guardian.  How the welfare system set up to help people actually keeps them living beneath the poverty line; how the government uses the threat of further poverty against the poor; how the best thing we can do to lift people out of poverty is simply to give them more money."
"118""Top story: Brexit transition vision published Good morning  its Warren Murray with the news at breakfast time. Theresa Mays government seems set to ask for a transitional period of up to two years on customs and trade with the European Union. But the idea of temporarily staying under the existing EU trade umbrella after Brexit has been scotched on the grounds it would not allow Britain to negotiate deals with other countries. The Tories have been tying themselves in knots over how to avoid a cliff-edge Brexit with catastrophic consequences for British business. Today, the government will put out a position paper that calls for a temporary customs union allowing movement of goods across borders to continue as now. Longer term, the government proposes to either set up a streamlined customs border with the EU that would be managed by Britain alone; or mirror the EUs approach to trade so closely that there would be no need for such a border at all.  A chunk of Mays senior ministry, as well as business leaders, still favour a longer, softer transition. Labours Keir Starmer, the shadow Brexit secretary, said the latest proposals were incoherent, inadequate and designed to gloss over deep and continuing divisions within the cabinet. The Lib Dem Brexit spokesman, Tom Brake, said: The only way to ensure free and frictionless trade with the EU is to remain a full member of the customs union and single market. The Confederation of British Industry welcomed the new details but said all efforts should be made to deliver a single-step transition, so that businesses dont have to adapt twice. * * * Charlottesville fallout  A string of CEOs have quit Donald Trumps business advisory board after the president took days to directly condemn the racist groups behind deadly violence in Charlottesville. Racism is evil, the US president said at the White House on Monday, while finally singling out the KKK, neo-Nazis, white supremacists and other hate groups as repugnant to everything we hold dear as Americans. Critics said he should have summoned those words straight away on Saturday as rioting took off. Web domain registration and hosting companies have been kicking hate sites off their servers in the wake of Charlottesville, while the likes of Airbnb are trying to stop alt-right members making bookings. * * * Swift wins groping case  A jury has ruled in favour of Taylor Swift who went to court against a DJ she accused of grabbing her backside during a backstage meet-and-greet in 2013. The musician counter-sued Denver host David Mueller for a symbolic $1 after he demanded $3m on the grounds that her complaint was false and ruined his career. A judge threw out Muellers claim on Friday. Swift said her victory was only possible because she could afford the enormous cost of the legal fight, and she would be donating to organisations that help sexual assault victims defend themselves.  * * * Kims missiles look Soviet  Rocket engines used in North Koreas intercontinental ballistic missile tests probably came from Russia or former Soviet state Ukraine, experts have said. The International Institute for Strategic Studies said they were different from any rockets the regime had used before and seemed to be modified Soviet-era RD-250 engines. Ukraine has denied supplying the technology, calling any such claims a Russian smear attempt. The Ukrainian company that makes the engines was the target of North Korean espionage in 2011, according to the UN. The Trump administration and Kim Jong-un have meanwhile continued to exchange prickly language as joint US-South Korean military exercises get under way. James Mattis, the US defence secretary, warned things could quickly escalate into war if North Korea attacks Guam as threatened. The North said the US-led military drills could have the same effect. But in a slight easing of tensions, Kim Jong-un signalled he was prepared to wait and see what the foolish Yankees do next before deciding whether to launch ballistic missiles in the direction of Guam. * * * A true hero  Bernard Kenny, who was stabbed trying to ward off Jo Coxs killer, has died aged 79 from cancer. Kenny was awarded the George Medal for his bravery but had not yet received it. He was hit in the stomach as he rushed in to tackle the rightwing extremist Thomas Mair.     Bernard Kenny tried to save Jo Cox. Photograph: ITV    Kenny had the same birthday as Cox. He worked as a miner for 40 years, including as a rescuer who tried to save victims of the Lofthouse mine disaster in 1973. His son, Phil, said Kenny died peacefully at home yesterday. He was a very private, unassuming, family man. Stubborn, kind and fair. An excellent bloke. * * * Since youre here ...  today we have a small favour to ask. More people than ever are regularly reading the Guardian, but far fewer are paying for it. Advertising revenues across the media are falling fast. And unlike many news organisations, we havent put up a paywall  we want to keep our journalism as open as we can. So we think its fair to ask people who read us often for their help. The Guardians independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our perspective matters  because it might well be your perspective, too. If everyone who reads our reporting, who likes it, helps to support it, our future would be much more secure. You can give to the Guardian by becoming a monthly Supporter or by making a one-off contribution. * * * Closing the pay gaps  Advertising all jobs with flexible working could help tackle the 18% gender pay gap, according to the equalities watchdog, which has taken a snapshot of disparities across the population. Giving men more parental leave would alleviate pressure on women to take lengthier breaks or leave their jobs upon becoming mothers, say the reports authors. People from ethnic minorities are behind by 5.7% on pay, while people with disabilities get 13.6% less. Male Bangladeshi immigrants have a gap of 48% compared with white British men, but most female ethnic minority groups have a pay advantage over white British women. Health and mental wellbeing also form part of the picture  men with epilepsy earn 40% less, men with depression or anxiety have a pay gap of about 30%, while women with mental health problems earn 10% less. * * * Losing the force, Luke?  The neophyte Jedi of the original Star Wars films was always a little whiney, but in old age this has apparently worsened into a deep funk about the Force and its gifts. Luke Skywalker intones that it is time for the Jedi to end after he is found hiding out on a space rock in upcoming instalment The Last Jedi. Ben Child wants to know how he made this journey from the heights of blowing up two Death Stars and redeeming his dad, Darth Vader, to falling into a Sarlacc pit of crotchety despair.  Lunchtime read: How the Saudis kidnapped their own princes Sensational accounts have emerged of how Saudi Arabia snatched away three members of its own royal family who were known for their dissident views. Prince Sultan bin Turki was kidnapped mid-air, according to westerners who were on board his plane. Saudi security forces posing as flight attendants pulled out weapons and the Cairo-bound aircraft was diverted to Riyadh. The screaming prince was separated from his entourage and has not been seen since.     Prince Sultan bin Turki with members of his entourage. Photograph: Hugh Miles    The westerners say they were made to sign documents, then flown out of the country. They have told their story to the BBCs Arabic network. A similar fate seems to have befallen Prince Turki bin Bandar  scooped up in Morocco and then deported to Saudi  and Prince Saud bin Saif al-Nasr, who disappeared after being lured on to a private plane for a purported business trip to Italy. Sport A step into the unknown is how Stuart Broad has described Englands maiden day-night Test match against West Indies this week as his team prepare for the Ashes series later this year. The former world 400m record holder, Michael Johnson, has urged the public not to get carried away with Britains late haul of medals at the world championships and says he is concerned that athletics is not doing enough to justify its 27m investment from UK Sport. Jrgen Klopp has described Liverpools Champions League play-off with Hoffenheim as the most difficult step towards reaching the lucrative group stage for only the second time in eight seasons, while Chelsea have responded firmly to Diego Costas claims of maltreatment, demanding the striker return to training and get himself fit for first-team selection. Premier League clubs are set to discuss a landmark change to the transfer window that could end domestic player movement before the start of the season. And the Australian track cyclist Stephen Wooldridge, an Olympic and world champion, has died aged 39. Business Asian markets seemed to react positively to signals that tensions between North Korea and the US may be easing, with shares experiencing a rally along with the US dollar. Japans Nikkei stock index was 1.3% higher at the end of morning trading following increases on Wall Street on Monday. Overnight the pound was buying US$1.30 and 1.10. The papers The Financial Times and the i lead today with news that the UK government will try to hang on to something like existing customs arrangements with the EU for several years following Brexit  a revelation that already has Nigel Farage fulminating.      The Guardian and the Times also feature that story on page one, alongside Donald Trumps belated announcement, in response to the killing of a civil rights activist in Charlottesville, that racism is evil. For the Telegraph, todays biggest news is that Big Ben is to fall silent for four years to protect the ears of those carrying out restoration work inside the tower  or, according to the Daily Mail, to ensure that health and safety succeeds where the Luftwaffe failed. (It is not, incidentally, the first time the clock has gone quiet for repair work.) The Sun and Metro lead on a court hearing over a fatal collision between a cyclist and a pedestrian. The cyclist said it was the fault of the pedestrian, who was killed, but prosecutors say his riding was dangerous. The Mirrors front page has ex-BHS boss Sir Philip Green bathing in bubbles at a champagne party in Greece  perhaps having heeded news in the Daily Express, which wants us to drink more wine to live longer. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Morning Briefing by email, bright and early every weekday, sign up here."
"119""Two Russian flight attendants have won a partial victory in their legal fight against Russian national carrier Aeroflot, which they accuse of gender discrimination. A court in Moscow found that Aeroflots rules regarding the physical dimensions of its employees were at fault and ordered the company to compensate Evgenia Magurina, 42, and Irina Ierusalimskaya, 45, for the earnings they had lost after being taken off the airlines more lucrative long-haul flights because they were a size 48 (a UK size 14) or larger. While the court in Moscow did not uphold all the two women complaints on Wednesday, the ruling is a landmark decision against a large, state-controlled company and has highlighted how women in modern Russia are often judged on their appearance. Magurina will receive 17,000 roubles (227) and Ierusalimskaya 11,000 roubles for lost wages, while both women were allocated 5,000 roubles in damages. The outcome was definitely a victory, Magurinas lawyer, Ksenia Michaylichenko, said after the hearing, the Associated Press reported. We were not suing for money. We wanted the court to acknowledge that you cannot treat people like that.   Related: Aeroflot gender discrimination case reaches court in Moscow    But the compensation was significantly less than the half a million roubles that Magurina had sought in a legal battle she began earlier this year. She had also wanted Aeroflot to admit it discriminated on grounds of gender. Aeroflot denied on Wednesday that the court had found the company guilty of discrimination. We are satisfied with the ruling, which clearly recognises that Aeroflot does not operate discriminatory policies or breach the rights of staff based on age, sex, race or other grounds, the airline said in a statement. We will study todays ruling in detail before deciding whether any changes to our policies are needed. The two women had earlier vowed to take their case to the European court of human rights if they did not receive justice in Russia. Magurina and Ierusalimskaya both had their cases thrown out by local Russian courts in April.  Aeroflot was accused of running a campaign to make staff  whose uniforms include red skirts and jackets embroidered with a hammer and sickle logo  younger and more attractive. Magurina and Ierusalimskaya alleged that the Russian carrier photographed and measured all flight attendants, and took those women who were deemed too large off the better paid and more prestigious international routes. The group of flight attendants jokingly call themselves STS, an abbreviation of the Russian for Old, Fat and Ugly. They said they were just a few of hundreds of Aeroflot employees who had suffered discrimination."
"120""Two Aeroflot flight attendants are to have their gender discrimination claims against the airline heard in court in Moscow this week in the first case of its kind to involve a major, state-controlled Russian company. The two women, both in their 40s, are suing after the Russian carrier photographed and measured all flight attendants and, their claim argues, took those women who were a Russian size 48 (a UK size 14) or larger off the much coveted  and better paid  long-haul international flights. They are among hundreds of female Aeroflot employees who say theyve been discriminated against. Perhaps the government is beginning to feel a bit of shame, one of the complainants, Evgenia Magurina, said before her appeal at the Moscow city court on Wednesday. If this happened in America, theyd all be on strike.  The two women both lost their cases in local courts in April. Magurina, 42, and fellow complainant Irina Ierusalimskaya, 45, say Aeroflot has embarked on a campaign to make their staff  whose uniforms include red skirts and jackets embroidered with a hammer and sickle logo  younger and more attractive. The group jokingly call themselves STS, an abbreviation of the Russian for Old, Fat and Ugly. Magurina said she was between a 48 and the next size up. While there is also a cut-off size for men no male employees have appealed to the countrys cabin crew union about a reduction in salary or being taken off routes, according to Sergey Saurin, the lawyer representing the two women. Aeroflot, a member of the SkyTeam alliance, which includes other major carriers such as Delta and Air France, denies the Russian women claims. Aeroflot does not place geographical restrictions on where individual members of cabin crew may fly, said Vladimir Alexandrov, the airlines deputy chief executive for legal matters. We view any selectivity policy based on standards other than aviation requirements as completely unacceptable, he said in a statement. However, Aeroflot representatives had appeared to tacitly acknowledge that such a policy was indeed in place at a press conference in April. Aeroflot is a premium airline and part of the reason people pay for tickets is the appearance of its employees, said Pavel Danilin, a member of the airlines public council. Nikita Krichevsky, another member of Aeroflots public council, said the penalties should not be seen as a salary docking but as an incentive to lose weight.  Magurina has submitted pay stubs showing the difference in her salary  a drop of about 20%  after she was demoted. She is seeking half a million rubles in damages (6,600) and wants Aeroflot to admit that it discriminated based on grounds of gender. If unsuccessful this week in the Moscow court, the two women plan to take their case to Russias supreme court and the European court of human rights if necessary. Ierusalimskayas case is to be heard on Monday. Soviet-era employment rules in Russia can feel both enlightened and woefully out of date. Women enjoy longer maternity leave than many European counterparts, but they are also banned from more than 450 types of jobs, including conducting a freight train and driving a bulldozer. Amnesty International last week called on the Russian government to abandon such restrictions as a 31-year-old aspiring captain took a Russian shipping company to court after it refused her the role on the basis of her gender. The case against Aeroflot comes as Russian women grapple with significant changes to their lives, in what Magurina described as a new war against women in the heavily patriarchal country, where feminism is still widely considered a dirty word. Russia will mark 100 years since the October Revolution, which gave women freedoms unparalleled elsewhere in the world. In 1917, all Soviet women were given the right to vote; three years later, the Soviet Union became the first state in history to legalise abortion. The early Soviet feminists advocated free love, women fought on the front lines of the second world war and, in 1963, a young astronaut from central Russia became the first women in outer space. But now, as Russia flexes its muscles on the global stage, activists say the country has arrived at a time of shrinking freedoms. Modern Russia is about being strong. And within this context, women are more objectified than before, said women rights activist Alena Popova. She spent much of last winter protesting against recent changes to domestic violence legislation, standing in freezing temperatures outside government buildings. Lawyers say the changes to the law, which decriminalised certain aspects of domestic violence if it happens not more than once a year and does not result in a concussion, has been interpreted as giving abusers free rein and the number of women being beaten has soared. There is also growing pressure to outlaw abortion in Russia. Due in large part to the growing strength of the Russian Orthodox Church, an anti-abortion campaign has accelerated in recent months.  For Magurina, her personal struggle is eclipsed by a greater sense of injustice. People keep asking me why I would try to take on a system. But someone has to start the revolution somewhere, she said."
"121""Girls as young as seven feel they cannot say or do what they want because of gender stereotyping, according to a survey highlighting the impact of expectations of young females.   Related: Children are straitjacketed into gender roles in early adolescence, says study    A poll of nearly 2,000 young people by the UK charity Girlguiding found that 55% of girls aged seven to 21 said they did not feel they could speak freely because of their gender. A further 57% said this affected what they wore, and nearly one in two said it made an impact on how much they participated at school. Sophie Wallace, a member of Girlguidings advocate panel, said the results were disgraceful, and that girls and young women were being denied a basic right because of their gender. She added: Society needs to understand that gender stereotypes arent just harmful but a barrier to progress. The research found that gender stereotypes were reinforced by different sources, and arose from teachers, parents, social media, TV and other media.  One girl, quoted in the report, said that a physical education teacher told pupils to do a girl press-up. She said: I stood up and told him that he was being sexist and that he was being offensive.  Another girl said: Sometimes when girls want to play sports in school, boys make fun of you. I want to play football but I cant because I feel uncomfortable and boys stare at you. The poll also found that 26% of girls aged seven to 21 thought PE was more for boys than for them.     Early learners: but how long before expectations for girls dampen their drive? Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo    A third respondent said: My mum told me that I should not be playing video games because thats a boy thing, and I said that everyone has the right to gaming because its a hobby and if I like it then I like it. The findings also showed that girls believed certain subjects, such as science and maths, were more suitable for boys. Additionally, 42% of girls aged seven to 10 thought boys were better than girls at being strong.  Those surveyed called for more to be done to challenge preconceptions. According to 95% of girls aged 11-21 the advertising industry should make sure adverts show more positive, diverse representations of their sex. Natasha Devon, an author and campaigner who works in schools throughout the UK said it was disheartening to hear how stereotypes were limiting girls options. We teach girls that pleasing others is the most important virtue and that being well-behaved is contingent upon being quiet and delicate, she said. Maria Miller, the Tory MP for Basingstoke, and chair of the Commons women and equalities committee, said the results showed that outdated stereotyping was damaging to confidence and needed to be tackled from an early age.      A little girl in the 1950s gets to clean up with mother. Even in 2017 toys are marketed assuming certain gender preferences. Photograph: Lambert/Getty Images    She said: The government has to show more urgency. There must be clear guidance for schools that leaves them in no doubt about their responsibilities to keep girls safe and tackle gender stereotypes, as well as [give] support for those experiencing harassment and abuse. We will be keeping a close eye on government action on this issue over the coming months. Wallace said the report showed glimmers of hope and most girls said they felt confident in their ability to protect themselves online and were unfazed about entering a male-dominated area of work.  Tricia Lowther, from the campaign Let Toys Be Toys, said: Its not surprising that so many girls feel strongly affected by gender stereotypes. When we look at the messages children receive from from toys, books, clothes and media, we can see that gender stereotypes are widespread.    Related: Gender pay gap starts early with 20% disparity in pocket money  study    Take toy catalogues for example, even in 2017 the majority of images show us that girls are expected to be interested in dolls and beauty toys, while boys prefer building, fighting and racing. Children learn more quickly during their early years than at any other time in life and these repeated messages help form deep-seated beliefs that can be very hard to shake off later.  To tackle gender equality we need to ensure that childhood is free of stereotypes that have a negative effect on how children feel about their place in the world. Case study: Suzie, 19, student, from Scotland I thought about doing physics at school but decided not to in the end. I did an arts subject. It was where my interests lay but I do wonder sometimes whether it was a path decided for from me at a younger age  due to stereotypes. We need to make sure we dont put genders on subjects and jobs, and make sure girls see women working in science. Gender stereotypes are insidious and affect us in lots of ways we dont realise. For example, girls being stopped from saying what they want to. I guess in terms of speaking out in class. I know I would rather not come across as pushy and loud, and that is partly something you learn through school about how girls should behave. That still affects me a bit at university. Sometimes I would hesitate to put my hand up.  I am studying politics but I am not sure what I want to do after university. People always ask me if I want to be an MP, but one of the reasons I dont is because of the way female MPs are treated in politics. When you see women like Theresa May and Diane Abbot  put under so much pressure to be amazing at their jobs but also to present and look lady-like. They are under so much more scrutiny then male politicians and its not something that is appealing. I do my best to challenge gender stereotypes whenever I can with my younger cousins. I challenge them to look outside the box a bit and encourage other women to do the same."
"122""If you have ever worked alongside both men and women, you will almost certainly have seen for yourself some of the classic gender differences in behaviour. Anyone still in doubt about their existence could have observed how Cordelia Fine conducted herself this week. On Tuesday night, the distinguished neuroscientist was awarded the Royal Societys science book prize. One of six nominees, she had flown into London from her home in Melbourne on Monday, and is trailing her suitcase behind her when we meet the following afternoon, before heading back to Heathrow for the 24-hour journey home. I assume she must have known she would win, as who would come all this way otherwise? She looks surprised and shakes her head. No, no. I was just really, really thrilled and excited about&#xa0;being nominated. At 42, Fine is enormously successful. After graduating with a first from Oxford in experimental psychology, she took a masters at Cambridge, followed by a doctorate from University College London. Her first book was nominated for the Royal Society prize in 2007, while her second, Delusions of Gender, was listed by the Huffington Post under: Books women think men should read. Her third, Testosterone Rex: Unmaking the Myths of Our Gendered Minds, was acclaimed by the judges this week as an original, very funny, and cracking critique of the men are from Mars, women are from Venus hypothesis. With a cheque for 25,000 in her&#xa0;case, Fine could have been forgiven&#xa0;for swaggering  or at the very least strutting  across the hotel lounge to be interviewed. But the women who sidles up to the table is so equivocal and self-effacing, its hard to believe she can be the author. Her sentences are prefaced with Ummm, a pause, a sigh, and I suppose , delivered in a barely audible murmur with the demeanour of a rabbit who hates being caught in the headlights even more than the norm for her species. If Fine looked only half as uneasy, I would ask her why, but Im too afraid the question will only make matters worse. Instead, I draw her attention to a&#xa0;news story about the purported finding of a connection between men with wide faces and promiscuous or risky behaviour, all determined by varying hormone levels, thinking it will be a nice prompt to get us going. But after skimming the story, she puts it aside in inscrutable silence and begins by telling me that, while posing for our photographer earlier, on the pavement amid the crowds at Oxford Circus, she attracted the attention of a&#xa0;passing gaggle of teenage boys. Whats she famous for? they shouted. She wrote a book which just won a&#xa0;science prize, explained the publicist. And, of course, Fine smiles wryly, they dispersed immediately. So if there was ever any danger of me getting a bit ... She completes the sentence with an upwards tilt of the chin, to gesture grandeur, an alert to a danger so comically remote in her case that I could hug her.   Related: Testosterone Rex by Cordelia Fine review  the question of mens and women brains    I spend a lot of the next hour trying to work out why this eminent winner is so startlingly unlike almost every man Ive ever interviewed after an awards-ceremony triumph. Her awkward inhibition has to be partly down to the difficulty all scientists face, when asked to explain their work in terms a&#xa0;scientifically illiterate fool like me can understand. But Fines gift for rendering complex neurological concepts comprehensible is one of the many reasons why her book is so brilliant. The daughter of the celebrated novelist Anne Fine, she writes like a dream, not just by the lifelessly humble standards of most scientific prose, but by any literary measure, and her book sparkles with pithy wit when describing, for example, a demographic of rich white men as: Those who, in response to the social justice movements currently fashionable suggestion to check your privilege, would take significantly longer than others to complete the task. Anyone who writes this well couldnt fail to have plenty to say in person, so Im inclined to put the discrepancy between her confidence in print and reticence in person down to catatonic jetlag. There is, however, another plausible explanation. From the pay gap to the boardroom, we have overwhelming evidence that men are typically competitive, boastful and pushy at work, while women consistently undervalue their worth, undersell their services and underestimate their ability and potential. Fines book does not dispute the truth of these stereotypes, but instead challenges the widely held belief  whose popularity we can mistake for authority  that gender inequality is biologically programmed by our hormones, and thus the natural order of things. To boil the vast diversity and complexity of humanity down to testosterone, and explain everything from extramarital affairs to the financial crisis on this one hormone, is, she argues, both scientifically baseless and absurd. For years, evolutionary biologists have claimed that men and women are programmed to be promiscuous and monogamous respectively, in order to maximise their reproductive prospects. However, according to Fine, the vast range of different sexual behaviours found both between different species and within species comprehensively disproves the myth of a universal reproductive principle dictating all of our sexual norms. There are many, many other factors involved that can greatly complicate the picture, whether to do with idiosyncracies within the species or the particular context theyre in, whether within one species or across species. And it just complicates the whole picture. But what it means is that you cant generalise from one species to another. One of the really interesting things about humans in relation to sexual behaviour is just how inefficient our reproductive activity is, more than any other species. Our hit rate for sexual activity to reproductive success is extremely low, so that has significance for the reproductive benefits of casual sex with multiple partners versus monogamous sex. It also points to the other key feature, which is that sexual activity for us is not just about reproduction. Its come to serve some other purpose. And you see that in other primates as well. You dont have&#xa0;that&#xa0;tight hormonal sexual activity that you see in other species thats like:&#xa0;job done. Similarly, our assumption that men are programmed by testosterone to take more risks, and that what caused the financial crash was an excess of testosterone among bankers, is not substantiated by the evidence. All we have to do is expand our definition of risk-taking to include activities not traditionally investigated, and account for the different benefits and costs men and women face, and the evidence for some sort of innate behavioural disappearance falls apart. For example, Fine writes: The reported gender gap in risk-taking would almost certainly narrow if researchers questionnaires started to include more items like: How likely is it that you would bake an impressive but difficult souffl for an important dinner party, risk misogynist backlash by writing a&#xa0;feminist opinion piece, or train for a&#xa0;lucrative career in which theres a&#xa0;high&#xa0;probability of sex-based discrimination and harassment? Fine stumbled upon her field of gender neuroscience by accident, when her two sons were still infants and she read a popular parenting book, Why Gender Matters, which cited all sorts of scientific studies in support of its thesis that boys and girls have such innately different brains they must be raised quite differently. Smelling a rat, she consulted the studies for herself, and found they had been wildly misrepresented and proved nothing of the sort. How does she explain, I ask, the popularity of the men are from Mars, women are from Venus oeuvre, if it is&#xa0;so flawed? When we look at the world as it is, and the continuing inequalities that we have  my book looks particularly at occupational inequalities  I think theres some kind of a relief in thinking: Well, look, its not injustice thats creating this situation, its just naturally ordained. So you can think: Oh well, that seemingly impossible task of creating something more like gender equality  were off the hook. I think thats one plausible explanation. Its easy to see how the theory that testosterone governs all male behaviour, making it futile to ask them to change, might appeal to men. But why have so many women been willing to&#xa0;subscribe&#xa0;to it? Whats interesting, she says, is how easily what she calls the T-Rex theory of gender politics can be superficially misleading and easily misread as very positive towards women. Women are wonderful, theyre so warm and kind and caring. Its very much an equal but different. So its not a kind of antipathy towards women, and I think theres an appeal for women in being perceived more positively than men are. Unless, of&#xa0;course, women start to behave in ways that dont conform. Benevolent sexism says: Oh, women are so sweet and kind and caring. But that very easily pushes into hostile sexism, because if theyre not sweet etc, then&#xa0;theyre&#xa0;bitches. As the mother of two boys myself, Im keen to know how Fines work has informed her own parenting, and how she hopes it will influence that of her readers. I should by now have guessed, though, that didactic prescriptions will not be forthcoming. When I ask, she almost flinches, and looks appalled. I dont really feel qualified to give parenting advice."
"123""The Anglican church in Scotland is to face de facto sanctions imposed by global church leaders next week for its acceptance of same-sex marriage. Leaders of the global Anglican communion, meeting for five days in Canterbury, are expected to impose consequences on the Scottish Episcopal church along the lines of the punitive measures dished out to the US Episcopal church last year for its embrace of LGBTI equality. The measures include a bar on membership of representational bodies and an exclusion from decisions on policy. Scottish Anglicans voted overwhelmingly in June in favour of allowing same-sex couples to marry in church, setting the church on a collision course with the Anglican communion. The Anglican church in Canada is expected to follow suit. At the time of the Scottish decision, Archbishop Josiah Idowu-Fearon, the secretary general of the Anglican communion, said the move would be discussed by Anglican primates at next weeks meeting. There are differing views about same-sex marriage within the Anglican communion, but this puts the Scottish Episcopal church at odds with the majority stance that marriage is the lifelong union of a man and a women. This is a departure from the faith and teaching upheld by the overwhelming majority of Anglican provinces on the doctrine of marriage, he said. The January 2016 meeting of primates imposed de facto sanctions on the US church for its acceptance of same-sex marriage, and issued a statement in support of the traditional doctrine that marriage should be between a man and a women. Their fragile agreement acknowledged the deep pain of the divisions within the communion, but added: It is our unanimous desire to walk together. However, three of the 39 primates have declared they will boycott next weeks meeting in a sign of continuing discord over same-sex relationships, with one warning of the next great Reformation or schism within Christianity. Archbishops Nicholas Okoh of Nigeria, Stanley Ntagali of Uganda and Onesphore Rwaje of Rwanda have said they will not attend in protest at what they see as the Anglican communions failure to uncompromisingly back traditional interpretations of the scriptures on sexuality. In an open letter to conservative Anglicans, Okoh said he had attended the previous meeting of primates in January 2016 in the belief it might be possible to change the pattern of repeated failure to preserve the integrity of Anglican faith and order. But, he added, the will of the orthodox primates is frustrated and misrepresented [and] false teaching is not being corrected  In these circumstances, I have concluded that attendance at Canterbury would be to give credibility to a pattern of behaviour which is allowing great damage to be done to global Anglican witness and integrity. Okoh, who is chairman of the conservative Anglican organisation Gafcon, said that 500 years after the greatest schism in Christianity, followers of the church were living in the midst of the next great Reformation. In our day also there is broken fellowship, over homosexual practice, same-sex marriage and the blurring of gender identity, none of which are mentioned in the Creeds, but all of which contradict fundamental biblical understandings of marriage and human identity. Ntagali said the fabric of the Anglican communion had been torn by the actions of the US Episcopal church, which consecrated a gay bishop and approved same-sex marriage. At times, I wonder whether we really share a common faith! If we are not walking in the same direction, then how can we walk together? he wrote to explain why he would not attend next weeks meeting. The decision by the three primates to boycott the gathering illustrates the north-south divide in the Anglican church, with leaders from African countries prominent among those advocating traditional interpretations of the Bible and churches in the UK and North America generally moving in a more liberal direction. A letter sent by a group representing more than 240 members of the Church of England general synod to all primates before next weeks meeting emphasised the decisive steps [taken] towards an inclusive church that can better serve both our church and nation, and in particular the LGBTI community. The Human Sexuality Group believes there has been a sea change in support for the LGBTI community within the synod since the last primates meeting. The direction of travel for the Church of England is clearer than ever, its letter says. Giles Goddard, the groups chair, said: The status quo is no longer an option  people are deeply concerned about the impact of our mission to the nation of the churchs current stance towards LGBTI people. The January 2016 meeting of primates set up a task group to examine issues of human sexuality and to present a preliminary report to next weeks gathering. However, the report will not be made public. The archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby said next weeks gathering would face tough questions. He urged Anglicans to pray that primates would be able to walk onwards together.  Sixteen new primates have been appointed since the last meeting, which will also discuss climate change, refugees, the persecution of Christians and all the great issues of the world, Welby said. The Church of England announced on Wednesday that the number of people training to become priests was at the highest level for a decade, at 544 men and women, a 14% increase on last year. Women accounted for more than half of new ordinands this autumn. The church has set itself a target of increasing the number of ordinands by 50% by 2020, and particularly wants more female, ethnic minority and young trainee priests."
"124""Speakers Corner in London was where suffragettes met to debate the laws and rights of the day. This was the intention for women who congregated there on 13 September to be directed to a meeting to discuss the impact of proposed legislation on gender identity. The venue could not be advertised because the original one, a community meeting space, had been intimidated into cancelling the booking. Transgender activists who opposed the debate taking place instigated a campaign to shut it down, which led to the attack on 60-year-old Maria MacLachlan by multiple assailants. Her camera was smashed, her hand cut, and her face and neck bruised. Attempts to minimise or justify this violence from those who sympathise with the cause these protestors claimed to support are deeply worrying. Some members of the trans community have expressed their revulsion at the actions of this violent vanguard. Others, perhaps intimidated from speaking out for fear of being ostracised, must find their voice if there is to be reasoned discussion of legislation that affects us all. Women have a right to free association and assembly. Politically motivated violence aimed at silencing women and shutting us out of political discussion will not succeed.Linda BellosLucy Masoud FBU LGBT London secretaryProf Deborah Cameron University of OxfordHelen SteelKaren Ingala Smith Chief executive officer, NIAGemma Aitchison Founder, YES MattersBea CampbellNaomi Fearon Deputy general secretary, Socialist Educational AssociationRahila GuptaEllenor HutsonRebecca LushRachel Moran Founder, SPACE internationalMargaret Prosser Labour, House of LordsYasmin RehmanJudith JonesRuth Serwotka Convenor, Socialist Feminist NetworkSam Smethers Chief executive, Fawcett SocietyDr Mary-Ann Stephenson Co-director, women Budget GroupDr Eva Neitzert Co-director, women Budget GroupKiri Tunks Convenor, Socialist Feminist NetworkDr Jennifer WilkesHarriet Wistrich Founder, Centre for women JusticeVictoria Brittain  Join the debate  email guardian.letters@theguardian.com  Read more Guardian letters  click here to visit gu.com/letters"
"125"" There are nearly 56 million abortions every year in the world and almost half of them are unsafe, according to a major piece of research from the World Health Organisation. The study found that there were 55.7 million abortions every year between 2010 and 2014 worldwide, and of them 17.1 million were unsafe because the women was taking pills alone or was with a trained helper but using a method of abortion that is no longer considered best practice.  But a further eight million abortions, categorised as least safe in the study, involved desperate and dangerous backstreet measures, from swallowing toxic substances to inserting wires to try to bring about a miscarriage. The highest levels of unsafe abortions were in Africa, where only about one in four are safe and as a result abortion deaths are high.  The new figures, from the WHO with the Guttmacher Institute, are published in the Lancet medical journal at a time when international family planning organisations are deeply concerned over cuts to their budgets announced by the Trump administration in the United States.    Unsafe abortions globally   Experts say the proposed cuts, together with the reimposition of the restrictive Mexico City policy (also known as the Global Gag rule) which forbids US federal funds to any organisation that counsels women on abortion, can only make things worse. The study finds that there are fewer abortions in places where abortion is safest, such as in northern Europe and northern America where women can get contraception easily. The authors explain that most countries in those two regions have less restrictive laws on abortion, high contraceptive use, high economic development, high levels of gender equality, and well developed health infrastructures.  Lead author Dr Bela Ganatra, from the WHO, told the Guardian their work showed the persistence of inequalities by geography, by income, by levels of development ... thats the real tragedy that these findings point to. Safe abortion is a very safe procedure. It can be provided at primary healthcare level. It isnt even necessary that it has to be a procedure. Now you can use tablets. There is nothing that requires this to be highly resourced. It is not science that is holding back the progress but barriers in terms of stigma and law. In Latin America, where many countries have a ban on abortion in nearly all circumstances, women have resorted to misoprostol, a tablet which they can access online, ideally taken with mifepristone as well. It is a very safe method that women are taking into their own hands, said Ganatra. If they access the pills through a telemedicine service such as Women on Web which gives them information and support, the study classifies this as safe abortion, she said. But there are large numbers of women obtaining the pills online who do not have help, and those would be less safe. The availability of the tablets is an improvement, said Ganatra. At least it is moving away from the means that led to death. But at the same time, not dying is not enough. Deaths are highest in west and central Africa, at around 450 per 100,000 abortions, although the study authors warn that the mortality estimates are based on data from different time periods. They say women may die as a result of more serious complications because of the dangerous methods used to bring about an abortion  and their health services may then not have the skills or resources to treat them.  Gilda Sedgh, the Guttmacher Institutes lead on the study, said it had not been long enough since the re-imposition of the Global Gag rule by President Trump on his first day in office to assess the impact. But there had been some research on the effects of its imposition during other Republican administrations, which had stripped funds from organisations such as the International Planned Parenthood Federation. There was no evidence that the Gag rule resulted in a decrease in the incidence of abortion, she said. A couple of studies in sub-Saharan Africa had suggested it led to an increase as a result of the shrinking of contraception provision by NGOs. Looking forward we can only predict, based on the past, that thats how it might play out, she said. Ganatra said their findings call for the need to ensure access to safe abortions to the full extent of the law, particularly in low income regions of the world, and efforts are needed to replace the use of unsafe methods with safe methods. Increasing the availability, accessibility and affordability of contraception can reduce the incidence of unintended pregnancies, and therefore abortions, but it is essential to combine this strategy with interventions to ensure access to safe abortions.  This article was updated on 29 September 2017 to correct the spelling of the lead researchers name. She is Dr Bela Ganatra, not Gunatra. "
"126""Saudi women have hailed a move by the conservative kingdoms ruler to allow them to drive as a landmark moment in a society where gender roles have long been rigidly demarcated and strictly enforced. Women contacted by the Guardian responded with jubilation to the law change, which activists and senior Saudi officials claim marks a watershed in the country. The mindset has shifted, said Sultana al-Saud, 26, from Riyadh. We werent waiting for our families to accept, we were waiting for something larger to back us up, a backbone, which is the government.   Related: I felt like one of my fathers songbirds, let out of its cage: driving as a women in Saudi Arabia    This is a huge step for women, its nice to see women behind the wheel metaphorically I believe its like her leading her life now. The patriarchy is slowly but surely turning to land of equality. This is amazing. Its the first few steps of freedom, we didnt even reach 2030 yet, she said in reference to a government plan to transform Saudi society. We are part of this big vision. We women are now taken into consideration. Under the new law, women can legally obtain a driving licence without asking a male guardian for permission, despite guardianship laws that grant Saudi men power over female relatives.  Less than a day after the royal decree was issued, Saudi women said the shock was still being absorbed across the kingdom, where societal rules are often governed by an inflexible reading of Islamic teachings.  Senior Saudi clerics appeared to be onside, responding with an apparently coordinated series of public statements, aimed at shifting a widely expected conservative pushback. The commission of top Islamic clerics tweeted: May God bless the king who looks out for the interest of his people and his country in accordance with sharia law.  Dr Abdel-Latif al Sheikh, the former head of the religious police, tweeted: Women driving is not against sharia and women will choose what best suits them. Sheikh Khaled al Mosleh, a professor of religion in Saudi Arabia, also tweeted that allowing women to drive answered the needs of a big portion of the population, and added a lengthy justification for the move under Islamic law. Theres still a lot of rumours going on, said Saud. Sharia law can still play a large role in this. There are rumours about women not being able to drive (in parts of) Saudi, that you have to be above a certain age, that there might be a curfew.     The shock announcement comes after years of resistance from women rights activists, some of whom were jailed for defying the ban on female driving. Photograph: Fayez Nureldine/AFP/Getty Images    Sana Kayali, 21, a university student in the Saudi capital, said: This is a very good beginning. Who wouldve thought we are starting to become modern. I believe change will take place gradually. Saudi leaders have longed pledged to overturn the driving ban, which had meant that the countrys female citizens were the only women in the world legally forbidden from sitting behind the wheel. They had couched the delay as necessary to condition deeply conservative sections of Saudi society to a change that has broad implications for women roles. Amal al Dayyem, 23, another university student in Riyadh, described the announcement as real beginning. Most families will be on board with this simply because people no longer want to spend a huge chunk of their salaries on drivers and transportation. We can do this on our own, she said.  Women all over the Gulf can drive, it was about time we Saudi women get the right to as well. Society will be accepting once they see how easier matters and everyday chores will be once this is implemented. Madawi al Blehid, 36, a personal trainer, said: This is something huge for us, women and girls. Its not just about driving per se, this is about the fact that it is now our right and we have the freedom of choice. Were no longer under the mercy of drivers and siblings.    Related: Women in Saudi Arabia: what do you think of the driving ban being lifted?    The fact that we need approval of family and society is normal. This is the first time so  we cant just explode on the scene it will cause a lot of problems. Even in taking it slowly, there will be problems but we should be able to overcome. Women are overjoyed. We woke up happy. Maysoon Sleiman, 55, a doctor from Riyadh, said: The thing is, a house cannot function properly without a driver and a lot of families cannot afford to hire one.  This has nothing to do with religion, its our customs. Which is why I expect backlash and disapproval from a lot of women not just men. A long time ago, they used to shoot at satellite dishes because they were dubbed haram [forbidden], now they sell them. Its going to be the same in this I believe. At least mothers can now safely drop their kids to school."
"127""Women continue to bear the mental load in Australian households, spending almost twice as much time as men on daily domestic activities and childcare.  According to the latest report on gender indicators, released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) this week, women spend, on average, two hours and 52 minutes of their day on domestic work and 59 minutes on childcare. In contrast, men spend one hour and 37 minutes on domestic work and 22 minutes on childcare. In May, this concept of women undertaking the bulk of household work  not just in doing menial chores but in organising and effectively managing the home  was the subject of a viral illustration by the French comic book artist Emma.   Related: The gender wars of household chores: a feminist comic    The pattern begins early: according to the ABS, 95% of non-public sector employees who took parental leave as the primary carer in 2014-15 were women. Men made up 96% of the employees who took secondary parental leave. The report notes primary parental leave is the type of leave most likely to affect peoples career trajectories. Men in managerial positions were more likely to take paternity leave than those on a lower rung, particularly if they happened to work in the finance or insurance industry. Women in the mining industry had the highest uptake of maternity leave, while retail workers had the lowest. Seniority was also a factor in women taking maternity leave: one in 15 female managers accessed some form of parental leave in 2015-16 compared with one in 25 non-managers. In total, 84,886 women and 33,306 men took some form of parental leave in 2015-16. Single mothers were the least likely of all parents with dependent children to have a casual job, meaning they had no paid leave entitlements. Twenty-six per cent of single mothers had no leave entitlements, compared with 21% of single dads, 19% of coupled mothers and 17% of coupled fathers. Women aged 24 to 44, the age where they are most likely to have dependent children at home, are 2.5 times more likely to be out of the workforce than men of the same age. The gap is widest between the ages of 30 and 34. The outcome of this and other employment gaps is a 56% difference in superannuation upon retirement. The average super balance of men aged 55 to 64 in 2013-14 was $321,993, compared with $180,013 for women of the same age. Women earned $0.89 in the dollar to men, an average wage gap that has been steady for a decade. The median wage gap was slightly smaller, with the median wage for women returning $0.92 in the dollar to the median wage for men. This was true even in when men and women had achieved the same qualification in the same field.   Related: Gender disparity in top positions looks set to remain abysmal | Greg Jericho    The starting salary for female undergraduates with a bachelor degree in the architecture and building field was $50,000, compared to $59,000 for male undergraduates. The gap evened out for engineers. Women made up less than 1% of all engineering graduates but they earned an average starting salary of $62,300, only marginally behind the average starting salary for men of $62,600. Across all fields, the gap in starting salaries was 6%, with male graduates starting on $60,000 and females on $56,400. Women were in general more educated. Forty per cent of women aged in their late 20s had a bachelor degree or above, compared to 31% of men.  Of university educated women, 28% had a qualification in business, management, or commerce. The most common university degree for men was engineering, which accounted for 30% of male graduates. Women were three times more likely to have qualifications in a health field and 4% more likely to have education qualifications."
"128""What makes a 13-year-old kill himself? It was November 2016 in Guangzhou, China, and I found myself asking this question after reading the news from home. Reports were coming in that a kid named Tyrone Unsworth had taken his life in my home state of Queensland. I call him a kid for a reason: Tyrone had barely hit his teens. Photographs showed a fair, freckly, curly-haired boy, a sassy moppet who danced and worshipped at the twin altars of Gaga and Beyonc. Those who knew him told me later that he was the kid doing cartwheels at lunch; the sensitive one whod tell his teachers, to their faces, that he loved them. For anyone to take their life that young is gutting, but what really got me was how his mother raged that Tyrone had been bullied to death for being gay. The Courier-Mail ran a heart-bruising headline that day: Mums anguish: They ended up getting him. Tyrones suicide was front-page news in the state. The story was splashed across the ABC, News Corps metro titles and Fairfaxs Brisbane Times. It ran on TV news bulletins across the country and was featured on the ABCs 7.30 and international outlets in the following weeks. Curiously, though, the story didnt run in the Australian, the countrys only national broadsheet. In fact, the Australian would never run a single word about Tyrones death.   Related: I will not stand by and let more queer kids tumble into helplessness | Nic Holas    My mind wandered back to the first time Id set foot in mainland China, half a decade ago, when Id spent months interviewing young gay women and men in Beijing for a book chapter. There was a lesbian who didnt even know the word for gay until adulthood; a man whod been overprescribed antidepressants as a teenager to cure him of homosexuality; gay men and women whod held elaborate sham weddings to fool parents into thinking they were straight. Many told me about the times theyd considered or tried killing themselves. When the book came out, the most common response was pity. Poor China. So backward for queers, especially compared with Australia. Yet here we were. Another Australian at the Guangzhou conference was the writer Melissa Lucashenko. Like me, Lucashenko is queer and from Queensland; like Tyrone, shes Indigenous. For queer Indigenous Australians, Tyrones suicide was felt even more keenly.    Every push for the protection of queers in Australia has been accompanied by a jeering soundtrack of loathing    That day, Lucashenko and I sought each other out. Did you read the news? Christ, poor kid. Apparently he was gay. Thirteen years old, too. The unspoken thought hovered between us: imagine wanting to kill yourself at that age. Thing is, we probably could. It might seem self-centred and disingenuous, a performance of false intimacy, to grieve for someone youve never met. But if you grew up queer in Australia, Tyrone Unsworths suicide felt personal. At Tyrones age, I attended a school where  as in most Australian schools, Id venture  being gay was one of the worst things you could be. Some would argue it is the worst. After all, it still has the strange honour of being the only identity ascribed to anything in the schoolyard deemed to be shit. If you grew up queer in Queensland, your experience was likely tougher still. After New South Wales decriminalised homosexuality in 1984, Queensland dug in its heels the year after and attempted to pass an amendment to the Liquor Act banning bars from serving perverts and deviants. Earning its reputation as Australias Deep North, it was the last mainland state to make gay sex legal. Every push for the protection of queers in Australia has been accompanied by a jeering soundtrack of loathing. For some commentators, howling down queer activists is something of a family tradition. In 1994 columnist Frank Devine wrote in the Australian of Tasmanian efforts to decriminalise gay sex, that one must deplore the arrogance and meretriciousness of the effort by homosexuals to have [these laws] rescinded. A generation later, his daughter Miranda would take it up a notch in News Corp metro newspapers, advising marriage equality activists to take our olive branch and shove it where the sun dont shine.   Related: The judges' verdict on equal marriage: change in Australia only comes with pain | David Marr    In all of this, kids were assumed to be off-limits. However, by the time Tyrone killed himself, the Australian was in its 10th consecutive month of indefatigable, sustained coverage and criticism of Safe Schools Coalition Australia, a federally funded program launched in 2014 to support lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer school students. SSCA was inexpensive  $8m over three years (by contrast, the National School Chaplaincy Program cost $243.8m over four years)  and designed to address long-documented higher rates of abuse, suicide and self-harm. Independent studies consistently show LGBTIQ Australians have the highest rates of suicidality of any demographic in the country. When it was launched, Safe Schools was largely seen as a political no-brainer. This was a time when everyone  on both sides of politics  was seemingly happy to back Safe Schools. These were kids, after all. That changed in February 2016, when the Australian ran its first front-page story excoriating the Safe Schools program. (Its headline: Activists push taxpayer-funded gay manual in schools.) Within hours of the story, Safe Schools was being debated in parliament. Within days, Coalition backbenchers had pledged to destroy it. Within a fortnight, prime minister Malcolm Turnbull requested education minister Simon Birmingham launch a review. After one month, Birmingham confirmed that Safe Schools federal funding would not be renewed. That didnt mean the coverage stopped. As long as Safe Schools continued in any form, so too would stories in News Corp papers. Like many Australian queers, by November 2016 I was exhausted by the Australians coverage of Safe Schools. The suicide of Tyrone  a kid who was likely driven to his death by schoolyard taunts and physical assaults  felt like the last straw. That afternoon in China, in a fog of self-righteous rage, I leapt over Chinas firewall and logged on to Twitter, where Australians were already posting about Tyrone. The hot takes had begun. Linking to the Courier-Mails story, I added my own:  Tell your kids  no matter how young  that being LGBTIQ is fine, that bullying is torture, and then demand Safe Schools.  Ill admit it. I felt smug when it was retweeted over 300 times. Thatll show them, I thought. Who Id shown  and what, exactly  well, clearly, I hadnt thought that far ahead. In researching this essay, I now see that tweet for what it is: a premature take on something I thought I understood, but actually knew next to nothing about. Id read a lot about Safe Schools by that stage, mostly in the Australian and its metropolitan sibling titles, but my knowledge of the program had been gleaned from stories I now realise were at best inadequate or misleading, at worst simply false. My tweet, in its own way, was a small drop in a pointless slurry of commentary about Safe Schools, built on shaky foundations, bad faith and half-truths. Some News Corp journalists would have you believe Safe Schools involved queer activists accessing classrooms and students, without parental consent or knowledge, to teach children about same-sex attraction and transgender people. (Horrifying to some, that actually sounds like something I wish Id had growing up.) Or maybe you heard Queensland MP George Christensen denounce Safe Schools in the lower house for promoting penis-tucking, chest-binding and gender fluidity to primary school kids, or for handing them tips on where to buy sex toys online. None of these things was true.     Protesters attend the Hands Off Safe Schools rally in Melbourne in March 2016. By the time Tyrone Unsworth killed himself, in November, News Corp publication the Australian was in its 10th consecutive month of criticism of the federally funded anti-bullying program. Photograph: Chris Hopkins/Getty Images    We know certain things about Tyrone Unsworths life and death. We know he posted about killing himself on social media. We know he was involved in an argument with other teenagers so violent that they broke his jaw. We know he expressed distress over his sexuality. Its impossible to know whether Safe Schools could have saved Tyrone Unsworths life. It very well could have. But what remains now is an opportunity  and arguably the ethical obligation  to take a breath and move beyond tedious queers-versus-parents, activists- versus-moralists trench warfare. To do this, we might need to acknowledge something uncomfortable: that everyone invested in this discussion wants the same thing: to keep kids safe. The conundrum, of course, is that our interpretations of what constitutes the safety of children differ wildly. While members of the Australian Christian Lobby and the anti same-sex marriage lobby group Australian Marriage Alliance see Safe Schools as an extreme ideology designed merely to make LGBTI children feel comfortable (quote marks theirs), Australian queers are impatient for change, seeing one kids suicide attempt as one too many.   Related: The reality of Safe Schools: more a life-saving support than queer theory classroom invasion    Can we agree on a baseline, then? In his 2012 book Far from the Tree, American-British author and journalist Andrew Solomon suggests: It seems right to prioritise each childs mental health over a system that makes universal predictions about what should constitute happiness or what values are healthy. Few of us would argue against this. Yet the past two years of debate over Safe Schools have seen reporters elevate the opinions of zealots (one of whom publicly proclaimed transgender children the work of Satan) and selectively defer to medical and education experts who have long histories of expressing anti-gay sentiments in their professional work. Subsequently, some of the most vocal backlash has come from extremists on the other side, including queer activists whove raided and trashed the office of a senator, and those who argue any journalist working at News Corp has blood on their hands. (For what its worth, I happily wrote for News Corp every week for six years.) In all the posturing and point-scoring, vital context and nuance have been lost. Who has the time to get their head around the complicated intricacies of departmental bureaucracy when theres an ideological scrap to be won? Why have important voices  non-partisan medical experts, education academics and LGBTIQ youth themselves  been erased? And why, in 2017, are commentators still railing against a queer agenda or ideology these things would sound anachronistically quaint if they werent so nakedly hateful. Given were planning to spend $122 million on a non-binding survey on the rights of our citizens that will be delivered via the post, however, its fair to say were fond of strange anachronisms right now.     QE67 Moral Panic 101 cover    For those of us for whom change feels too fast and too confronting, its worth asking ourselves what were afraid of. What the hysteria around Safe Schools has shown us is weve become so frightened of phantom hypotheticals lately that were asking the strangest questions, with little bearing on reality. That has paralysed and distracted us from asking the simplest and most important questions of children: What do you need of us? And how can we help? This is an edited extract of Benjamin Laws Quarterly Essay 67, Moral Panic 101: Equality, Acceptance and the Safe Schools Scandal, out now. Law will be discussing the essay with David Marr on 13 September at the Seymour Centre in Sydney.   Readers seeking support and information about suicide prevention can contact Lifeline on 13 11 14. Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467. MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78. Local Aboriginal Medical Service available from vibe.com.au"
"129""The Scottish Episcopal church has responded defiantly to de facto sanctions imposed on it by the global Anglican communion over its decision to allow same-sex marriages, saying love means love. Anglican primates meeting in Canterbury agreed the Scottish church should be barred from representational bodies and excluded from decisions on policy for three years after it voted in favour of permitting same-sex marriages in church earlier this summer. Responding to the move, Mark Strange, the bishop of Moray, Ross and Caithness and primus of the Scottish Episcopal church, said he recognised that the decision to allow same-sex marriage was one that has caused some hurt and anger in parts of the Anglican communion. But he was unrepentant, adding: I will do all I can to rebuild relationships, but that will be done from the position our church has now reached in accordance with its synodical processes and in the belief that love means love. The punitive measures are in line with those imposed on the US church last year, although conservative elements within the communion have complained that those consequences have not been properly enacted. Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury and leader of the Anglican communion, said the primates meeting had heard expressions of disappointment and strong feelings from many of the provinces during the hour-long discussion, but there had been no need for a formal vote on the issue. Despite the decision by the primates of Nigeria, Uganda and Rwanda to boycott the meeting over the issue of sexuality, Welby said others present expressed themselves forcefully and the communion continues with profound struggles. The archbishop likened the Anglican Communion to a family thats having to face the fact that somethings happened that is causing grief [rather] than a club that doesnt like one of its members. Even so, he repeated his assertion in a recent interview in GQ magazine that differences between Anglican conservatives and liberals were irreconcilable. Thats a fact, and its no use pretending it isnt, he told a press conference in Canterbury. But a split was not inevitable, he insisted. Asked if he stood by comments broadcast at the weekend, in which he claimed the BBC had not shown the same integrity over accusations of child sexual abuse as the Catholic and Anglican churches, he said: I may not have put it very well but none of us can ever afford to say weve done that, thats behind us. When he was appointed as archbishop more than four years ago, he had not been aware of the extent of the legacy of abuse. I feel the church  and its widely accepted in the church that we have a long history of significant failure  should be held to a higher standard because were the church. But its also clear that the issue of abuse goes right through our society. Almost all our major national institutions have failed. My profound sense of shame at what the church has done remains  To survivors Id say we know we did wrong, and were trying as hard as we can to get things right. Survivors of sexual abuse in the church are planning a protest in Canterbury on Friday, the final day of the primates gathering."
"130""With her city in near ruins, and facing the most profound crisis of her political career, San Juan mayor Carmen Yuln Cruz made it clear she had no patience for, or interest in, a personal row with Donald Trump.   Related: Trump attacks Puerto Rico mayor: 'They want everything done for them'    I have no time for distractions. All I have is time for people to move forward, she told MSNBCs Joy Reid on Saturday morning. This isnt about me, this isnt about anyone. This is about lives that are being lost. This is a time where everyone shows her true colors. Trump showed his the next day, referring in a tweet to politically motivated ingrates who have criticised his response in Puerto Ricos hour of need. According to those who know her, Cruz certainly seems to be showing hers: as a no-nonsense leader with a talent for empathy to match. She goes head first, chest first. Shes not going to let anybody do what shes not willing to do, said Luis Vega, a legislator in the US territorys house of representatives. She has no patience for red tape and thats what we need right now, Vega added. Now the two-term mayor has become perhaps the most visible communicator of the commonwealths challenges in the wake of Hurricanes Irma and Maria, which devastated the island leaving virtually all of its residents without electricity and access to drinkable water and food. What we are going to see is something close to a genocide, Cruz said of what many have decried as a delayed and inadequate response to the urgent humanitarian needs of the island. Mr Trump, I am begging you to take charge and save lives, she added, pleading for a more robust federal response. Trump, as he has tended to during his brief political career, took Cruzs comments personally and on Saturday morning responded via Twitter, decrying Cruzs poor leadership and accusing her of being nasty to Trump. I was asking for help. I wasnt saying anything nasty about the president, Cruz retorted. Cruz was a late, surprise candidate in the 2012 election but won handily, defeating a three-term incumbent to become San Juans third female mayor. The mainland political action group Our Revolution described her election as the result of a grassroots effort which united in an unprecedented alliance groups which have traditionally been excluded from the democratic process. Born in San Juan in 1963, Cruz has been a leader and a competitor since childhood. President of her high school student council, Cruz set track and field records as a teen before she went to the mainland US for college in the 1980s. In 2012, Cruz ran on a platform that emphasized progressive change on issues of gender equality, LGBT and disabled rights, and a municipal plan for universal healthcare. Citizen participation has been at the core of her administration, and the city has begun trialling a participatory budgeting process since shes been in office. Cruz is a member of the centrist/centre-left Popular Democratic party, which favors Puerto Rico retaining that relationship with the mainland US, as opposed to full independence or statehood as other political parties advocate.    n Cruz: She is a force of nature.\" width=\"1000\" height=\"600\" class=\"gu-image\" />  Carmen Yuln Cruz: She is a force of nature. Photograph: Carlos Barria/Reuters    In 2016 she dedicated her election win to Oscar Lpez Rivera, a controversial figure in Puerto Rican politics, and a former member of a radical Puerto Rican independence group that committed several terrorist attacks on the mainland during the 1970s. Shes a feisty one. Im her friend and her ally and Ive also fought with her because were both very opinionated, Vega said. Ive never ever been prouder of her. She was no stranger to the mayors office when she was elected in 2012. Cruz spent 20 years in Puerto Rican politics before her run, starting off with a stint as an adviser to Mayor Hctor Luis Acevedo in 1992. Before that Cruz spent 12 years on the mainland, much of that time at Boston University and Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. There she was the first student to win the spirit award now presented annually to the student with the greatest positive impact on the quality of life of their peers. She is a force of nature, Jon Nehlsen, an associate dean at the school told the Pittsburgh Gazette. Shes probably not 5ft 2in, but shes this ball of energy, very charismatic. You can just tell she exudes leadership qualities. A bit of that was on display at the Roberto Clemente Coliseum, which is being used as a staging ground for relief efforts, on Friday. With tears in her eyes, Cruz greeted a stream of residents warmly, but was also candid about her frustrations with how the recovery efforts had been going so far. She hadnt eaten lunch until 3.30pm, just before she delivered the speech that ultimately drew Trumps ire. But theres little reason to believe that Cruz will adjust her tack in light of Trumps tweets. I am done being polite, she said on Friday. I am done being politically correct. I am mad as hell, so I am asking the members of the press to send a mayday call all over the world."
